```{=context}
\page [yes]
```
### Hierarchy of Awareness

The fundamental nature of our experience can be described as a
hierarchy, which Ven. Ñāṇavīra tried to explain in his FUNDAMENTAL
STRUCTURE (NoD). We are what we experience, it is not possible to view
(or imagine) this hierarchy from 'outside', independent of us, because
regardless of how far one steps back, one cannot abandon the experience
as such.

The experience, whether mundane or sublime, possesses certain
characteristics, and the most prominent among them is that it is
*hierarchically ordered*. This hierarchy goes into infinity in both
directions, and this is something which can be seen from the nature of
*particulars* and *generals*. If we take a look at our own experience as
it is, we can see that there are two aspects which appear as being more
pronounced than anything else. Those aspects are known as *immediacy*
and *reflexion*. Together they comprise this hierarchy of the experience
*as a whole*. Thus, the hierarchy we have been referring to can be
called *reflexive hierarchy*.[^38] If we want to be more
precise we can say that immediacy and reflexion, respectively, represent
two different modes of experiencing this hierarchy. In immediacy,
reflexion is not directly present; it is there, but placed in the
background. In reflexion, the immediate object is seen from an
*additional point of view*, which means that once we reflect upon
something, immediacy *does not* disappear, it rather becomes secondary
to the field of attention but, nevertheless, it remains there:

::: {.english}
> "In immediate experience the thing is present; in reflexive experience
> the thing is again present, but as implicit in a more general thing.
> Thus in reflexion the thing is twice present, once immediately and
> once reflexively. This is true of reflexion both in the loose sense
> (as reflection or discursive thinking) and *a fortiori* in the
> stricter sense (for the reason that reflection involves reflexion,
> though not vice versa). See MANO and also VIÑÑĀṆA." (NoD, ATTĀ (a))
:::

The presence of this reflexive hierarchy, as can be seen from
FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE,[^39] generates another dimension
to the experience. This dimension is also hierarchically ordered,
superimposed upon the original reflexive one; dependent upon it, but at
the same time responsible for the existence of it. This simply means
that their type of dependence is not temporal, i.e. it does not occur in
sequence. This new hierarchy is the *hierarchy of awareness*, and
although this hierarchy cannot go 'below' the experience as such
(awareness is always awareness of something in-the-world), there is no
limit for ascending levels of this hierarchy. As the term 'generating'
implies, with the presence of reflexive hierarchy the hierarchy of
awareness is also present---*simultaneously*; and as was already said,
the existence of this hierarchy, makes the reflexion possible in the
first place.

Let us try and say something more about the nature of superimposition,
which is relevant for these two hierarchies. When things are
*superimposed* they are not *directly* or *linearly* related. They are
simply *there*, next to each other and any thought along the lines of
*causality* distorts them as they are.[^40] This
superimposed way of existing is nothing else than what is meant by being
*akālika*, 'timeless' or 'beyond time'. Two things are there, dependent,
yet not directly related to each other. That is the reason why we said
that with the presence of reflexive hierarchy there is the *presence* of
the hierarchy of awareness. This precedes any notions of causality or of
time. Nevertheless, if we still insist on describing their mutual
relationship, the most accurate way would be to simply say: with
reflexion, awareness *is*; without reflexion awareness *is not*. This is
clearly a reference to *paṭiccasamuppāda* itself, so now would be the
right time to say something more about it.

*Paṭiccasamuppāda* is *a principle of timeless dependence*, i.e.
existential superimposition. With the presence of one thing the other
thing is simultaneously present, too. Thus, it is not possible to
conceive or imagine *paṭiccasamuppāda* without actually seeing it within
the experience, simply because conceiving and imagining, in its nature,
*involves sequence* (i.e. it is linear from the point of view of this
new hierarchy, and as such pertains solely to the reflexive hierarchy).
So, although hierarchy of awareness cannot go 'under' or 'in front' of
the immediate-and-reflexive experience, as we noted above, it can always
come 'closer' than it is.[^41] The point is that these
two hierarchies *do not touch* or *overlap*, they are
*perpendicular*.[^42] When we say 'hierarchy of
awareness', this should not be understood in a sense that one is always
aware. On the contrary, revealing this hierarchy requires effort, which
is being manifested through the practice of mindfulness. Nevertheless,
this hierarchy *exists*, and because of that the whole other reflexive
hierarchy is possible (see above). The difficulty lies in the fact that
this hierarchy cannot be *directly* grasped, and that is because any
notions of directionality originate from it.

The description made so far refers to the experience as a whole in an
*ideal* sense, i.e. the structure of experience has been described and
this structure is the same in *arahant* and *puthujjana*. The difficulty
is that the experience is, when we reflect upon it, already affected
with ignorance (*avijjā*). Ultimately, ignorance is nothing but the
*non-seeing* of the nature of superimposition of the two hierarchies.
Things are further complicated by the fact that even reflexive hierarchy
is not a simple order of different levels of generality of things; even
in this hierarchy, those levels are, in a way, superimposed in relation
to each other, and they are all 'kept together', so to speak, by the
fact that they can all be *attended* to from the perspective of the
hierarchy of awareness. This hierarchy unifies them, determines them or
'keeps them together'. Here we can recognize the nature of determination
(*saṅkhāra*), which, as the Suttas tell us, exist through the presence
of ignorance (*avijjāpaccayā saṅkhāra*). Thus, when one is not free from
igorance, the nature of the hierarchy of awareness is not understood and
because of that, that hierarchy will be implicitly taken *par value*, as
a kind of owner-creator of the reflexive one, i.e. of our experience.
This hierarchy of awareness appears as being *towards* the reflexive
hierarchy, as if 'pressing' in the direction of it.[^43]
Simply by not-seeing that it is directly dependent upon the reflexive
hierarchy, this 'pressing' of the hierarchy of awareness is being
followed at its face value, and one comes to *assume and accept* that
offered ownership over one's own experience,[^44], i.e.
one comes to assume that there actually *is* Self.

This is perhaps overly-simplified. As we said earlier on, the reflexive
hierarchy generates the presence of the hierarchy of awareness. This in
return, simultaneously determines reflexive hierarchy as such. However,
since there is no first moment of ignorance being manifested, both of
those hierarchies are affected by it, through and through. The hierarchy
of awareness appears as somehow 'in between' our reflexive levels of
experience, and that is what Ven. Ñāṇavīra meant by saying that they are
perpendicular (see footnote 2). As a result of the presence of
ignorance, this 'owner' which we mentioned above also appears like
something which is *somewhere within* our experience, 'neither here nor
there'. This elusiveness is maintained by the lack of one's capability
of an indirect approach,[^45] and as a result this
'owner' becomes identified with reflexive or immediate or
reflexive-and-immediate or non-reflexive-nor-immediate aspects of life.
In structural terms, simply not seeing this 'towards' of the hierarchy
of awareness, makes the experience distorted, and following it means
that one is going 'with the grain'---*anuloma*. Only, when 'towards' is
*indirectly* seen as being *directly* dependent upon things which are
impermanent, then the hierarchy of awareness will lose its 'pressure'
and remain standing there, "cut off at the root, like a palm stump." (MN
72 / i, 487) At this point the actual hierarchy is *paṭiloma*, 'against
the grain', i.e. 'towards' is seen as impermanent and because of that it
ceases to be the *reason of one's actions*, i.e. Self is destroyed.

Thus, Self is the reason for the existence of Self, i.e. both reflexion
and immediacy are equally affected by it. Only when
reflexion-and-immediacy are seen as a whole as being determined by
something else, the nature of the Self becomes revealed, which is that
it is *not-Self* (neither owner nor master). Thus, that *thing* which
was regarded as Self, does not disappear upon realization of *anicca*
and *dukkha*, it 'changes direction', so to speak, and becomes not-Self,
*anattā*. However, even then, the thing remains there and what
disappears is Self-view,[^46] and that is because the
hierarchy of awareness has lost its 'pressure';[^47]
thus certain assumptions in regard to reflexive hierarchy disappear.

[^38]: For more on this subject see CtP, L. 93, pp. 351f. It is not
    possible to clarify the point any further, simply because of the
    nature of the subject. When one reflects, in a strict sense (i.e.
    reflexion), one is *aware*. What is then present in one's experience
    is hierarchy of awareness *together* with those things that were
    reflected upon, i.e. revealed by reflexion.

[^39]: *NoD*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE , Static Aspect, §16.

[^40]: *Yena yena hi maññanti, tato taṃ hoti aññathā*, "In whatever terms
    they conceive it, it turns into something other than that." (Sn
    3.12)

[^41]: This is achieved in the practice of *jhāna*, which, however, will
    not concern us here.

[^42]: *NoD*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE , Static Aspect, §16.

[^43]: "It is in the nature of the *pañc'upādānakkhandhā* to press for
    recognition, in one way or another, as 'self'." (*NoD*, PARAMATTHA
    SACCA , §6)

[^44]: One does not see that the 'owner' depends upon his ownership.

[^45]: By an 'indirect approach' we imply seeing the nature of
    superimposition. As it was outlined above, the *direct* approach has
    been taken in this essay as *linear*, and as such it is incapable of
    reaching and understanding the hierarchy of awareness in a proper
    way (see the fifth paragraph). The *indirect approach* refers to
    seeing that with the presence of *what*, does *this* arise, and with
    the absence of *what*, does this cease. In other words, this is a
    phenomenological approach, or an approach founded upon *sati*,
    whereby the immediate things of experience are *not directly*
    followed at its initial appearance.
    
[^46]: View originating from the Self.

[^47]: Only an *arahat* is completely free from this pressing nature of
    experience. The case with other *sekhā* is that 'pressure' varies in
    degrees.