```{=context}
\page [yes]
```
### With birth, Death applies

1\. We are born. We come into this world through our birth.
As we shall see in the following paragraphs, there are many ways that one *can* think of one's birth.
However, from a phenomenological point of view our birth is always here *with* us.
The fact that one is constantly engaged with the world of one's desires, decisions and miseries, means that one is born -- his birth is *present*.
Obviously, for someone not used to thinking phenomenologically, it might be fairly difficult to pull oneself out of the habitual way of regarding things as something which is clearly defined, something palpable in one's experience.
For such a person 'birth' *is* an event from the past, and we shall address this issue in the paragraphs to follow.
However, there is also a simpler and easily overlooked reason for one failing to grasp the phenomenological description of 'birth'.
In our language the term 'birth', as a designation of experience, carries certain *past* connotations. 
These connotations are absolutely gratuitous, and we shall see that the reason for that lies in people's *views* (*diṭṭhi*). 
The established usage of terminology draws its significance (i.e. the meaning of its words) from the most *common* views (on the level of humanity or a particular culture), about the nature of experience. 
Needless to say, the common views are rarely correct, especially when it comes to the experience of an individual. 
These views can never represent the real *order of things*. 
Thus, apart from the way we speak, and use the language, nothing requires us to think that birth can, and shall *only* be understood as a past event which has started and ended *in* time.

2\. Naturally, it is possible for one to regard, and understand to a
certain extent, birth as something which has happened to him a long time
ago, even without having the actual memory of the event. However, this
kind of limited understanding is only possible in the *objective*
(scientific) *view* of the world, and oneself. We can even go a step
further and say that it is precisely *because* of that view that one
thinks of birth (and other things, including ageing-and-death) in these
temporal categories. With this kind of view, the objective world in
front of one, the world which is *in* time, takes precedence over one's
experience as such, which is *of* time (cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, *Notes on
Dhamma*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE, Dynamic Aspect, para. 5). One starts
regarding the objects that appear *through* one's experience, as
something more fundamental than the experience itself -- he puts second
that which is to come first, and he puts first that which is to come
second[^4]. As a result of this one starts regarding
oneself objectively as also being *in* time. Thus, time develops into a
category which has become *external* to everything, and all of the
things appear as being "within" it[^5]. Therefore, one
sees that others are born, their event of birth occurs in time, when he
observes it externally. But because he views himself externally too, he
naturally (i.e. in conformity with his view) comes to assume that his
birth has *also* occurred some time ago in the past. One also assumes,
since he can see it in his everyday experience, that death *will* happen
to him in that same 'external' sense, "as it happens to others all the
time". By regarding things in this way, he, as an individual, does not
feel threatened by any of it, until the *actual* death comes of course.
So, we can see that one doesn't adopt this objective view voluntarily --
when *avijjā* is present, the view is developed naturally as the
quickest way of offering one assurance from a threatening world. The
world and one's experience becomes explainable and measurable -- one has
regained *control*.

Let us get back to the phenomenon of 'birth', we were discussing. The
Buddha referred to 'birth' as: "Whatever birth, taking birth, descent,
coming-to-being, coming-forth, manifestation of aggregates, and
acquisition of \[sense\] spheres of the various beings in this or that
group of beings, that is called birth." (Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M. 9/i 50)

Thus, although we can agree that birth is some sort of a "beginning", so
to speak, a "manifestation of the aggregates", what obliges us to think
that that beginning has *ended* there? The fact that one keeps accepting
and using the five-aggregates, the fact that one is constantly involved
with the world of one's senses, doesn't that mean that one's
*manifestation* of aggregates is *present*[^6]? And would
one be able to desire various things in the world, if those things were
not manifested? If one were able to relinquish any attachment for his
own body, would one be bothered when that body falls apart and dies? It
is because one *affirms* that manifestation of the five-aggregates,
through desire-and-lust for them, that the manifestation *exists,* it
comes-into-being -- with being, birth is (*bhavapaccayā jāti*). And when
one regards it as 'mine', one ages, falls sick and dies (and also
experiences any other misery possible in this life) -- with birth,
ageing-and-death (*jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ*...). If there is no being
whatsoever, would manifestation be able to manifest itself? And if
nothing manifested, would one be able to appropriate it? And if there is
nothing which belongs to one, would one suffer on account of those
things breaking up and disappearing? No, because one has escaped.

3\. Let us go back to the question of when birth ends. Actually, we can
even ask when does birth start? The common view is that first one is
conceived, and than, after nine months or so, things culminate in one
being born. But when does the conception take place or when *exactly* is
one born? Is it with the formation of an embryo or with cutting of the
umbilical cord? Generally, the accepted view is that birth is over when
the baby comes out of the womb and into the world. And when it comes to
'general views', we all know that people often tend to blindly comply to
them, taking them for granted for the most (or whole) of their lives,
without even realizing they are doing so. In this case, 'birth' becomes
that which accords to the majority of opinions on that subject. One
chooses to conform with "what everyone else thinks", since the majority
is "always in the right". One accepts Heidegger's impersonal 'They' as a
dictator of one's own values, one finds *safety* in doing so. However,
no matter how secure the majority's view might seem, all it takes is for
someone else to come along and say (perhaps supporting it with "the
latest medical research") that birth actually ends when the formation of
an infant is completed in the womb, and that coming out of the mother is
not relevant as such, to question of birth itself. (Though, for parents,
even if they happen to be those scientists, this is probably *the most*
relevant part[^7].) If his utterance manages to change
the general opinion, if the majority of people come to accept it, we
will have a new, "more accurate" view on the nature of birth. The
majority might have been wrong earlier, but now it is in the right...
until it changes. And one can again choose to conform to that majority
and make a choice out of it, but no matter how far one goes that choice
will always remain *personal*, and as such, be on the level of *an
individual*. So, although one thinks what everybody else does, one
nevertheless remains *responsible* for that very thinking. It becomes
clear then that by choosing the majority's opinion on a certain subject
(in this case 'birth), out of 'faith' in modern science (or religion)
perhaps, a person chooses *his* *individual view* on given subject. So,
by deciding to accept the scientific explanation of birth, one decides
that birth, for him, is something observable, an event in the world.
Thus, whether one is aware of it or not, one is responsible for the
*meaning* of things in one's experience. Even if we go further and say
that we could pinpoint the exact *moment* of birth[^8],
when, for example, conception takes place, and even if the whole of
humanity, without an exception, agreed upon it, nevertheless, this would
not escape the *nature* of 'view', and that is to be 'imposed' onto
things in one's experience, while at the same time directly depending
upon them. In our case that would most likely be the 'objective view',
which is of course, based on personal preferences and
inclinations[^9]. Thus, for a *puthujjana*
coming-out-of-womb *is that* which is birth. His birth *exists.*

The Buddha, on the other hand, talks about the *nature* of birth, as a
phenomena (*dhamma*), in one's experience. He does not refer to birth as
an occurrence in time, upon which even *puthujjanas* cannot agree, and
this can be seen from the usual *paṭiccasamuppāda* (*p.s.*) description.
In this description, *jāti* refers to that 'nature' of birth and any
temporal events are completely irrelevant to it. If there is no 'birth'
whatsoever, if there is no manifestation (as such) of the aggregates, a
*puthujjana* would not be able to regard any event (in this case
'coming-out-of-womb') as *his*[^10]
birth[^11]. Thus, one doesn't suffer on account of birth
as an event in the past, one suffers on account of the *nature* of birth
in the *present*. In *p.s.* context, 'birth' structurally *precedes*
'ageing-and-death'. 'Ageing-and-death' is not 'birth', but they wouldn't
be without it -- together they arise, together they cease. So, it is
that with 'birth', 'ageing-and-death' (and 'sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief and despair') *apply*. Consequently, if we were to discuss
*jāramaraṇaṃ*, we could say that it is because ageing-and-death is
*present*, that one will age and die (and suffer) *in* time. But, if one
could manage, through an understanding of the Dhamma, to free oneself
from 'being' -- to bring it to an end -- ' birth' and 'ageing-and-death'
would cease to exist for him: all of the temporal occasions for
suffering would cease to be *his* suffering, since by not-being born,
one doesn't have the desire to interfere with them any more -- one is
free.

5\. Let me just say something more, for those who find it difficult to
accept that the existential (phenomenological)
method[^12] can validly be applied to Dhamma. We can put
aside Sartre, Heidegger and those like them, and disregard what they
have to say about birth. However, even in that case, still, we need look
no further than the *p.s.* description in order to see what the Buddha
meant by 'birth'. In Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M. 9/i 50, it is said, as we
already referred to it earlier on:

When a noble disciple has thus understood birth, the origin of birth,
the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the cessation of birth...
he here and now makes an end of suffering. In that way too a noble
disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

Thus, a Noble disciple, an *ariyasāvaka*, can by understanding 'birth',
in the same sense that he would have understood the Four Noble Truths --
directly and timelessly -- free oneself and become an *arahat*. So, one
may rightly ask now: would this be possible, if 'birth' were not already
somehow *present*[^13], as a phenomena, in our
experience? How would one be able to understand birth directly and
without involving time? If one's birth was indeed a distant event, in
some maternity ward perhaps, one's fate would be sealed according to the
Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, since the event of birth has already passed and
cannot possibly be understood directly. Fortunately, one's birth is not
*in* the past, so one can, if one chooses to follow the Buddha's
Teaching, cease to, in the present, regard 'birth' as his and by doing
so remove himself from the domain of ageing-and-death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief and despair. One can escape.

[^4]: Cf. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, in his Phenomenology of Perception,
    (Routledge Classics, 2007, p. 82): I detach myself from my
    experience and pass to the idea. Like the object, the idea purports
    to be the same for everybody, valid in all times and places, and the
    individuation of an object in an objective point of time and space
    finally appears as the expression of a universal positing power. I
    am no longer concerned with my body, nor with time, nor with the
    world, as I experience them in antepredicative knowledge, in the
    inner communion that I have with them. I now refer to my body only
    as a idea, to the universe as idea, to the idea of space and the
    idea of time. Thus 'objective' thought (in Kierkegaard's sense) is
    formed -- being that of common sense and of science -- which finally
    causes us to lose contact with perceptual experience, of which it is
    nevertheless the outcome and the natural sequel. The whole life of
    consciousness is characterized by the tendency to posit objects,
    since it is consciousness, that is to say self-knowledge, only in so
    far as it takes hold of itself and draws itself together in an
    identifiable object. And yet the absolute positing of a single
    object is the death of consciousness, since it congeals the whole of
    existence, as a crystal placed in a solution suddenly crystallizes
    it.

[^5]: Time, as a phenomena in one's experience, is regarded as more
    primordial (read -- 'permanent'), than the experience of things. The
    things seem to come and go, while the sense of time stays.

[^6]: Furthermore, nothing obliges us to think that 'manifestation of
    aggregates' refers to the event of coming-out-of-womb. The Buddha
    has said that "when mother and father come together and the mother
    is in season and the one to be tied is present, with the coming
    together of these three things, there is descent into the womb" (M.
    38/i 265-66). Thus, the five-aggregates are already manifested, in a
    way, even at the stage of an embryo, and before the infant is
    formed. (Cf. also A.III, 61/i, 176-7)

[^7]: And therefore it is not accidental that this is most commonly
    regarded as birth.

[^8]: This, in itself, is clearly impossible, since the "exactness", in any area of science, is determined by the capacities of one's
    perception (i.e. the refinement of our technology and observational
    instruments). (Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Notes on Dhamma, FUNDAMENTAL
    STRUCTURE, Static Aspect, para. 16.)

[^9]: It is very unlikely that the whole of humanity could actually agree
    on this (or anything), since all people are not the same. The birth
    of a baby, in this case, carries different significance for
    different individuals. A mother might say that her baby was born the
    moment she held it in her arms, and that it was conceived the moment
    she fell in love with its father. A scientist, in his carefully
    cultivated attitude of disinterestedness, might say that a baby is
    conceived when embryo cells become discernible (he observes it under
    his microscope!), and perhaps that it is born when it starts to
    breathe independently. For a doctor, involved in performing
    abortions, there is no question of 'baby' (i.e. 'human'), until
    three months are due. Thus, it is how one feels towards 'birth', how
    one perceives it, how one intends it, that determines what that
    birth is for him. ("Contacted, monks, one feels; contacted, one
    intends; contacted, one perceives." -- Saḷāyatana Saṃyutta, iv,10.)
    Also, compare the passage from the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta, M. 18/i
    111-112:
    
    ::: {.english}
    > Dependent on the eye and forms (ear, nose...) eye consciousness
    > arise. The meeting of three is contact. With contact as condition
    > there is feeling. What man feels, that he perceives. What he
    > perceives, that he thinks about. What he thinks about that he
    > diversifies. With what he diversified as the source calculations
    > about perceptions of diversification occupy a man with respect to
    > past, future and present.
    :::

[^10]: Compare this passage from J.P. Sartre -- Existentialism is Humanism,
    chapter on 'Freedom and Responsibility': Yet I find an absolute
    responsibility for the fact that my facticity (here the fact of my
    birth) is directly inapprehensible and even inconceivable, for this
    fact of my birth never appears as a brute fact but always across a
    projective reconstruction of my for-itself. I am ashamed of being
    born or I rejoice over it, or in attempting to get rid of my life I
    affirm that I live and I assume this life as bad. Thus in a certain
    sense I choose to be born. This choice itself is integrally affected
    with facticity since I am not able not to choose, but this facticity
    in turn will appear only in so far as I surpass it toward my ends.
    Thus facticity is everywhere, but inapprehensible; I never encounter
    anything except my responsibility. That is why I can not ask, "Why
    was I born? " or curse the day of my birth or declare that I did not
    ask to be born, for these various attitudes towards my birth --
    i.e., toward the fact that I realize a presence in the world -- are
    absolutely nothing else but ways of assuming this birth in full
    responsibility and of making it mine.

[^11]: This can be stated even more precisely: the temporal things (events
    in time) are possible only because there is an atemporal structure
    (nature of time) -- time is secondary to one's experience. Hence,
    the p.s. is said to be akālika, 'timeless'. (Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera,
    Notes on Dhamma, NP. & FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE). That is why, in the
    Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M. 9, we can see that a Noble disciple can, by
    understanding 'being', 'birth' or 'ageing-and-death' respectively,
    come to the same result -- complete freedom from suffering,
    arahatship. P.s. can be understood by understanding all or any of
    its "pairs", since each of them represent, or rather are, the
    principle of simultaneous dependent origination -- 'when this, this
    is' (imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti).

[^12]: We are not interested in the conclusions (or lack of them, as Ven.
    Ñāṇavīra would say) they drew from the method itself.

[^13]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op. cit., NP., para. 9 & 10. This 'somehow' is
    important to note. If a puthujjana, who is not satisfied with the
    idea of birth being something which occurred in his past, admits
    that there has to be some other way in which 'birth' can be present,
    and if he admits that he doesn't see that way, he might make the
    effort to find it out, and than eventually see it.