```{=context}
\page [yes]
```
### Meaning of the Heart

::: {.english}
> "What, friends, is the earth element? The earth element may be either
> internal or external. What is the internal earth element? Whatever
> internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and
> appropriated; that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin,
> flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm,
> spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces,
> or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is solid,
> solidified, and appropriated: this is called the internal earth
> element. Now both the internal earth element and the external earth
> element are simply earth element. And that should be seen as it
> actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not,
> this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is with
> proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and
> makes the mind dispassionate toward the earth element.\\ "Now there
> comes a time when the water element is disturbed and then the external
> earth element vanishes. When even this external earth element, great
> as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction,
> disappearance, and changeˌ what of this body, which is appropriated by
> craving and lasts but a while? There can be no consideration of that
> as 'I' or 'mine' or 'I am.' "
:::

> -- [MN 28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28)

Bring your attention to your heart. It's situated almost at the centre
of your torso, to the left just under the rib cage. Sense its movements.
Notice the beat, the rhythm, the muscular throb, the squish and pump of
blood.

If that piece of moving flesh were to stop or miss a beat, your
breathing would stop, you would pass out and away or you might just have
a tiny stroke, leaving you handicapped for many years to come. Your life
would change, either a little or a lot. Your plans for tomorrow would
cease, your skills would mean nothing, your lifestyle would be affected.
Your family or friends and your deepest prayers will not make that piece
of flesh in your chest keep working if it just stops. The heart cannot
hear you, it is not aware of your intentions, your missions, your loves
or hates. It just pumps blood...not for you or even itself, it just
pumps blood. It doesn't have a personality, it is not personally
invested in anything that you do. It is an impersonal piece of flesh
which your life is directly and structurally, dependent on.

The heart organ in your chest is inaccessible to you. Even if you were,
through the marvels of modern medical science, able to physically open
up your chest and not bleed to death, you would still find a heart organ
which you would have no internal access to. You could touch it, but you
cannot create it or control it directly. Which means that you can affect
it only secondarily, but you cannot choose the heart's rhythm and beat
to determine your life status or not, it does so whether you like it or
not. It determines your life, and without it, your choices cannot occur.

Attend to the heart, really get a good overall sense of its movement and
weight....and now with full intent, choose for it to stop beating.

What you will discover is that you are "outside" of it, even though you
would say that it is inside of you. That core of your personal body is
inaccessible to you, it is not yours to control, it is not you. Your
overall sense of body is undermined by a thing which is not yours and
which it relies upon for its life. Such a REVEALation highlights this
gratuitous assumption that "the body is mine, or is my-self". It reveals
a contradiction, you assume the body to be yours, yet it is anything but
yours. You realise, "My whole sense of self is situated on top of, or
undermined by organs which do not belong to me or to anyone else
anywhere."

::: {.english}
> "I don't belong to anyone anywhere. And nothing belongs to me
> anywhere." By often practicing and living in this way, their mind
> becomes confident in that dimension. Being confident, they either
> attain the dimension of nothingness now, or are freed by wisdom."
:::

> -- [MN 106](https://suttacentral.net/mn106)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

::: {.english}
Sense of self can only exist, if there is something being taken as
self. However, if it turns out that that which one takes as self, is in
fact not belonging to me, then that self has no legs to stand on, so to
speak. It slowly falls apart, it fades away, because it needs
*something* to assume to be itself. Something accessible, something
mine. Yet there is no-thing here that we can find as such.

> "Bhikkhus, that assumption(of ownership, of self ) is neither the same
> as these five aggregates subject to assumption, nor is the assumption
> something apart from the five aggregates subject to assumption. But
> rather, the desire and lust for them, that is the assumption there."
:::

> -- [SN 22.82](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.82)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your life is dependent on that heart. You can pay attention to what
you are doing whether walking, sitting, thinking, writing, making
coffee, etc. However, at the back of your mind you should remember and
keep reminding yourself of the meaning of that presently enduring heart
beating in your chest. As you go about your day, as you act towards
various things that occupy your attention (the foreground), remember
that there in the background is a heart which is determining your
activities. Once that situation becomes clearer, try to understand what
it *means*.

You could also try and pay attention to the beating heart directly, but
still try to discern its meaning peripherally, in the background.
Meaning of non-ownership and inaccessibility. You can also discern in
the background the rest of your body, your mood, thoughts, intentions,
desires, and notice just how dependent it all is on this heart here
beating that I am attending to, and just how dependent this heart here
is on those things working well for it to be. Let the meaning of that
reveal itself, i.e notice what that situation of "yourlife actions being
determined by this living, fleshy organ" means. Start to discern the
dangerous position that you are in. In other words, discern the
*paticcasamuppada* principle - with my heart beating, my life is; when
there is my life, there is my heart beating.......

::: {.english}
> "Bhikkhus, do you see: 'This'?"---"Yes, venerable sir."---"Bhikkhus,
> do you see: 'This manifests with that as a nutriment'?"---"Yes,
> venerable sir."---"Bhikkhus, do you see: 'With the cessation of that
> nutriment, what has come to be is subject to cessation'?"---"Yes,
> venerable sir."
:::

> -- [MN 38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38)

::: {.english}
> "And which is the noble method which is properly seen by him \[i.e.
> the noble disciple\], properly penetrated with understanding? Here,
> householder, a noble disciple attends properly, with perspective on
> the source, to this very dependent origination:
>
> When there is this, there is this.\
> When there isn't this, there isn't this.\
> When this arises, this arises.\
> When this ceases, this ceases."
:::

> -- [SN 12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41)

or

While keeping that situation in mind, seeing in that "simultaneously
dependent principle" way. Reflect how that beating heart here can stop
now, or...now or maybe later...and so on. Try to discern the meaning of
that. Meaning of being liable to death. -
[*Marananussati*](https://suttacentral.net/an6.19)

or

Expand your awareness to other parts of the body which you also do not
have ownership over. The brain, intestines, veins, lungs, muscles, etc.
Discern the meaning of that. That this body, all its parts, are all
dependent on each other, and your gratuitous ownership of them is not
even a requirement for them to continue their mindless task of being
bodily organs. - [*Paṭikūlamanasikāra*](https://suttacentral.net/dn22)
[*(32parts meditation)*](https://suttacentral.net/kp3)

or

Breathe in long and short and so on, while at the back of your mind
knowing the heart, the body, the feelings, the intention, the choice to
breathe in long and short, all enduring there simultaneously
dependent... all being inaccessible to your desires of ownership. Even,
despite being able to manipulate the breath, the bodily-intention to
breathe is not your own. Develop those discernments, uncover their
meaning more and more. See the phenomena of *anicca-dukkha-anatta* and
make that clear as day. - [*Anapanasati*](https://suttacentral.net/mn118).

Such contemplations into the nature of your existence and your
attachments, will most likely unnerve you at first, but if you are
accomplished in precepts and sense restraint, then you won't have
anxiety that will overwhelm you when you repeatedly see this and not
turn away from the unpleasant truth that says, "your very self is not
your own".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pay attention to the heart again. Where does its energy come from? Do
you have access to that? You can of course imagine or make up some story
about where the energy or *life forc*e comes from, but that would only
be done because you cannot sit with the fact that you don't know where
it comes from. That uncertainty reveals the deeper meaning of your
situation, which in turn makes you feel very uncomfortable, and so you
try to get rid of that discomfort by telling yourself a story to make
yourself feel better about your existence which is not your own.

What if that *energy* stops? Then the heart will stop moving. The heart
then is also not its own. It too is dependent upon that which it is not
in its control. And so if I do not even have access to the heart organ
in this body, what is to say about that which the heart depends on?

That energy, the activation, the life force, one could call
consciousness, the animaton of things, the presence of things. That
energy is not known without that which is energised, such as the heart.
I couldn't know about the "heart energy" if there was no moving fleshy
piece of meat. I can try to fantasise about the origin of that energy
and call it god, biology, or whatever else, but that would just be
another assumption used to cover up the reality that that particular
energy is completely inaccessible to me while I am intimately dependent
upon it. Both the fleshy heart and its *energy* do not know me, they are
both not mine, not my friend or enemy. They are both there, doing what
they do, when both are there.

::: {.english}
> "Now tell me, friend Sāriputta: Is name-&-form self-made or other-made
> or both self-made & other-made, or---without self-making or
> other-making---does it arise spontaneously?"
>
> "It's not the case, Koṭṭhita my friend, that name-&-form is self-made,
> that it is other-made, that it is both self-made & other-made, or
> that---without self-making or other-making---it arises spontaneously.
> However, from consciousness as a requisite condition comes
> name-&-form."
>
> "Now tell me, friend Sāriputta: Is consciousness self-made or
> other-made or both self-made & other-made, or---without self-making or
> other-making, does it arise spontaneously?"
>
> "It's not the case, Koṭṭhita my friend, that consciousness is
> self-made, that it is other-made, that it is both self-made &
> other-made, or that---without self-making or other-making---it arises
> spontaneously. However, from name-&-form as a requisite condition
> comes consciousness."
>
> "....Now how is the meaning of these statements to be understood?"
>
> "Very well then, Koṭṭhita my friend, I will give you an analogy; for
> there are cases where it is through the use of an analogy that
> intelligent people can understand the meaning of what is being said.
> It is as if two sheaves of reeds were to stand leaning against one
> another. In the same way, from name-&-form as a requisite condition
> comes consciousness, from consciousness as a requisite condition comes
> name-&-form. From name & form as a requisite condition come the six
> sense media. From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes
> contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From
> feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. From craving as a
> requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance. From
> clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming. From
> becoming as a requisite condition comes birth. From birth as a
> requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
> distress, & despair come into play. Such is the origination of this
> entire mass of suffering & stress.
>
> "If one were to pull away one of those sheaves of reeds, the other
> would fall; if one were to pull away the other, the first one would
> fall. In the same way, from the cessation of name-&-form comes the
> cessation of consciousness, from the cessation of consciousness comes
> the cessation of name-&-form. From the cessation of name-&-form comes
> the cessation of the six sense media. From the cessation of the six
> sense media comes the cessation of contact. From the cessation of
> contact comes the cessation of feeling. From the cessation of feeling
> comes the cessation of craving. From the cessation of craving comes
> the cessation of clinging/sustenance. From the cessation of
> clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the
> cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation
> of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, &
> despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of
> suffering & stress."
:::

> -- [SN 12.67](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/SN/SN12_67.html)

That *energy* which the body depends on, is itself dependent on the body
being available. Neither aspect of this situation as a whole can be seen
or known as independently arisen, and any independence is a complete
fantasy on my part, an assumption on account of the pressuring ambiguity
of my existence which is not in my control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Take for example a computer game which can have a third person view
of some character, walking in the bottom centre of the screen. That in a
way, is how one should try and view one's first person viewpoint, such a
viewpoint would be a right type of viewing. A way of seeing and knowing
this situation that you are framed by. In life, you can see other
people, over there or near you, and they are not what you think you are.
They are others who are "over there", and likewise is your body to
others, the same way their bodies are to you - "an other over there". No
matter how close they appear. Your body is on the same plain of the
other bodies you do not own. Your body is equally not owned by you.

If I can take this body which happens to be very close to this point of
view, as for me, or belonging to me, as self, I can also take other
bodies and things which are a little bit further away, like cars, house,
wife, child, cattle, wealth, country, and so on, i.e my sense of
ownership, my self has no limits, it can take everything personally. If
I can assume that a part of this nama-rupa domain, which is not-mine, as
mine, then I can assume any part of that domain to be mine or for me.

Take, again the example of a computer game, where you're playing a
character. That game is dependent upon electricity. When there is no
electricity there is no game. The electricity helps to animate the game,
it is not the game, yet is essential to it. These computer games can be
played from a first person point of view, whereby you just see the arms
and legs, etc. Such a point of view is the way we view the world, but it
would be useful to try and view our first person point of view in a
third person point of view manner, an ability to self-reflect, to
mentally step back and be aware of the situation as a whole while we go
about our day. However, unlike the game that we are outside of, this
life, we are inside of, we are inside as the assumption of ownership. We
are not outside. Our assumption of self cannot be found anywhere else
except here, surrounded by the situation as a whole. We only know this
which we are completely surrounded by, and to think that there is
outside of this or that we are enclosed and separated from a greater
external reality which is beyond this, means that we are assuming a
reality, we are imagining a reality which cannot be known and thus
living in delusion. The reality that we are imagining beyond *this* is
nowhere else to be found except here as an assumption in regard to this
situation and its components.

Therefore, this sense of self, being second to the situation as a whole,
being *dependent upon* an assumption of ownership in regard to this
situation as a whole, is *unownable*. It is dependently manifested, not
self-manifested . It depends on there being a situation as a whole,
operating, on its own. My self, then, is not my own because the things
which my self depends on for its existence, *cannot* be my own.

Sense the rhythm of the heart throughout your day, tune into its meaning
of *anicca-dukkha-anatta*, and let your *Self* fall apart.