```{=context}
\page [yes]
```
## 30hh- Four Noble Truths

::: {.english}
> \"And what, bhikkhus, is the majjhima paṭipada/middle-way to which the
> Tathāgata has fully awakened, which is useful for
> cakkhu-karani/insight, ñāṇa/knowledge, upasamāya/calming, to
> abhiñña/understanding, to sambodhi/awakening, to Nibbāna? It is,
> bhikkhus, this ariya aṭṭhaṅgika magga, that is to say: 1-sammā·diṭṭhi,
> 2-sammā·saṅkappa, 3-sammā·vācā, 4-sammā·kammanta, 5-sammā·ājīva,
> 6-sammā·vāyāma, 7-sammā·sati, 8-sammā·samādhi. This, bhikkhus, is the
> middle way to which the Tathāgata has awakened, which is useful for
> vision, which produces knowledge, and leads to calming, to full
> understanding, to awakening, to Nibbāna.
>
> Furthermore, bhikkhus, this is the dukkha ariya·sacca/noble truth of
> suffering:\
> 1- jāti/birth is dukkha,\
> 2-jarā/decaying is dukkha,\
> 3-maraṇa/death is dukkha,\
> 4-association with the disliked is dukkha,\
> 5-separation from the liked is dukkha,\
> 6-not getting what one wants is dukkha;\
> 7-in short, the pañcupādānakkhandhā\
> five assumed aggregates are dukkha.
>
> Furthermore, bhikkhus, this is the dukkha·samudaya ariya·sacca/the
> noble truth of the origin of suffering:\
> 1-Taṇhā/urge/inclination/craving/desire,\
> 2-which perpetuates being,\
> 3-connected with craving and passion,\
> 4-finding delight here or there,\
> 5-that is to say: kāma-taṇhā/sensual desire, bhava-taṇhā\
> desire for being and vibhava-taṇhā\
> desire for non-being.
>
> Furthermore, bhikkhus, this is the dukkha·nirodha ariya·sacca/the
> noble truth of the cessation of suffering:\
> 1-the complete virāga/dispassion,\
> 2-nirodha/cessation,\
> 3-cāgo/abandoning,\
> 4-paṭinissaggo/giving up,\
> 5-mutti/release and\
> 6-anālayo/detachment from that very taṇhā.
>
> Furthermore, bhikkhus, this is the dukkha·nirodha·gāminī paṭipada
> ariya·sacca/ the noble truth of the path leading to the cessation of
> suffering: just this ariya aṭṭhaṅgika magga/ noble eightfold path,
> that is to say:\
> 1-sammā·diṭṭhi/right view,\
> 2-sammā·saṅkappa/right resolve,\
> 3-sammā·vācā/right speech,\
> 4-sammā·kammanta/right action,\
> 5-sammā·ājīva/right livelihood,\
> 6-sammā·vāyāma/right effort,\
> 7-sammā·sati/ right recollection,\
> 8-sammā·samādhi/ right composure.\"
:::

> -- [SN 56.11](https://suttacentral.net/sn56.11)

**Q:** Ajahn, can you describe the Four Noble Truths - suffering, the
origin, the cessation and the path to cessation?

**Nm:** First and foremost, those are four aspects of one insight, that
insight being, freedom from suffering. If you\'re free from suffering,
then it already implies the knowledge of what suffering is, the
knowledge of what has been causing that suffering, the knowledge of
freedom from suffering and knowledge of how that freedom from suffering
is brought to fulfilment. It\'s not like 1-2-3-4 steps that a person
needs to discern one by one, it\'s about understanding suffering and
freedom from it.

The cause of suffering is nothing other than craving, which is something
that people might just read over because it seems to make perfect sense.
One might think that they perfectly understand what that means, but, in
terms of the direct insight or understanding that 'craving is
suffering', that should result in liberation from that suffering.
'Seeing/Understanding the craving as suffering' means 'abandoning the
craving'. So the only reason you crave is because you don\'t real y see
it directly, you don\'t understand it, you haven\'t discerned that truth
despite having read about it. The important aspect is to recognise that
whenever there is suffering present (including the liability to suffer),
you can induce correctly, that the craving must be present because the
suffering is there.

When the suffering is present means it\'s because simultaneously with
it, there is craving present. The absence of that craving simultaneously
means the absence of that suffering, there is no delay. That\'s why you
can have direct knowledge of freedom from suffering directly veri ed for
yourself, "Oh, I cannot suffer amidst things that used to make me
suffer, the mind cannot suffer now because there is no more craving in
regard to those things."

::: {.english}
> "He whom life no longer torments, who does not grieve at death, If
> that immovable one is one who has seen the state of peace, in the
> midst of sorrow he does not sorrow."
>
> For the monk who has cut off craving for being, whose mind is at
> peace, Having totally destroyed the perpetuation of birth, for him
> there is no more being.\"
:::

> -- [Udāna 4.9](https://suttacentral.net/ud4.9)

**Q:** How to abandon craving?

**Nm:** By developing virtue and sense restraint to the extent
necessary, whereby you start discerning your mental intentions, whether
they\'re rooted in wholesome or unwholesome, whether they\'re rooted in
greed, aversion, delusion, and when you know that they are, you do not
engage in them, you do not tolerate them, you do not entertain them, you
do not proliferate or invest in them. That will enable the mind to then
not resist the unpleasant feeling, to not indulge the pleasant feeling,
to not try to distract yourself from a neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant
feeling. And when the mind stops doing that, with the previous knowledge
that it received from outside, through the Suttas or a wise teacher,
with the previous knowledge of what craving is, you will be able to see,
"This is the absence of craving", and you will be able to see right
there, "There is no suffering", and then you will also be able to
understand what that suffering was, even the suffering of the past,
before you understood the way out. You wouldn\'t be suffering on account
of that either. The same knowledge will be applied to the present, past
and future.

**Q:** How to endure those painful feelings?

**Nm:** If you want to give into sensuality, ill-will, or distraction,
you don\'t give in, that will result in you enduring them.

**Q:** Then how does one know that one is free from craving?

**Nm:** When there\'s no suffering amidst things that used to be
suffering. There\'s no suffering because you cannot suffer, not because
you\'re hiding away or just avoiding things. Avoiding things means
you\'re afraid of something already. For example, say a person doesn\'t
leave their house, because they don\'t want to talk to anyone, because
it might annoy them, and then they\'l suffer. They are not free from
suffering, they\'re just protecting their precious environment of
circumstantial non-disturbance, but the fact that they must protect it
means that they are disturbed, which means they\'re not free from
suffering but only hiding away from the greater extent of their
suffering.

You need to have self honesty. So, if you know that you\'re not hiding
away, not indulging in sensual pleasures, not covering anything up, then
with that self honesty and restraint of the senses, seeing the danger in
the slightest fault, moderation in eating, that will result in being
mindful of your actions. Which means that the mind is already developing
a certain perspective which is needed to discern the intentions behind
your actions.

There is no craving without intention, but there is intention without
craving. That\'s why an arahant can still intend, decide and choose, but
he has no craving. In order for you to see that, you have to see the
intentions, and most people are not even aware of their mental
intentions. They think intention is an obvious choice. But it\'s not,
it\'s a subtle inclination. Thoughts in themselves are already
intentional. It\'s subtle and in order to reach that subtle level, sense
restraint and virtue, moderation in eating and mindfulness is absolutely
necessary. Paired with the right instruction, and the right way of
looking (*yonisomanasikara*), that\'s where the practice is. Without the
right instruction, it's just restraint, which is good, but it doesn\'t
lead you to any knowledge. With the right instruction and that way of
living (which brings about a greater perspective), that\'s all you need.

Sometimes people might think, "Restraint is not the Dhamma". That\'s
true, and then they would think, "Okay, well, now I got the Dhamma. So
now I don\'t have to restrain myself". No, Dhamma applies only where the
restraint is. Yes, restraint is not the Dhamma, as in, the application
of the Dhamma is not the same as the necessary basis for that
application, but you wouldn\'t be able to apply it if there is no
necessary basis.

If the mind practices like that, with self-transparency, then the
inclination in the form of craving becomes more and more obvious. Why?
Because you start recognising that in certain ways that you intend or
incline, you suffer, you make yourself more liable to suffering, you
feel too much, you become emotional y sensitive, you become too
involved, you become exposed to future suffering, and by discerning
those things, you stop intending like that, and by not intending like
that, you\'re not perpetuating the craving.

Craving is always in relation to feelings. In a present agreeable
feeling, you have to discern the inclination towards wanting more of it,
wanting it to stay longer, wanting it to not go away too soon, wanting
to increase it, to intensify it, to prolong it, any of those things. In
a disagreeable feeling, be it a general disagreeable mood or something
more specific, you have to discern the inclination towards resisting it,
towards trying to find the justification for it, towards trying to nd an
explanation for it, towards psychologizing it. Any of those things are
just mechanisms that you try to engage in, so to remove it, to get rid
of it. And the subtlest of feelings is the
neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant, when paired with craving, results in
inclinations towards distraction, delusion, indolence, laziness, mental
heedlessness.

If you don\'t incline towards a present feeling, in any of those three
ways, you will no longer be feeding *taṇhā*/craving.

**Q:** One should then be aware of feelings?

**Nm:**...to the extent that they have arisen on their own. Feelings
arise, and having arisen, they cease on their own. You have no say in
that. That\'s what 'mindfulness of feeling' means \'discerning their
nature\', knowing that they have arisen on their own. For example, this
present pleasant experience has arisen on its own. That\'s fine, so you
don\'t have to try to get rid of it, thinking, "Arisen pleasure means
craving!" No, it doesn\'t. Leaning towards that pleasure means craving.
Leaning away from the displeasure means craving. Leaning towards
forgetfulness and distraction when there is
neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feeling, means craving.

**Q:** So really you have to be aware of those leanings?

**Nm:** Yes, that\'s a good way to start. You can\'t see craving
directly, because craving is in your attitude of "leaning". You can
bring it down so precisely whereby you can see, either the presence of
suffering or the possibility to suffer. You can use that knowledge to
see the 'leaning'.

**Q:** There\'s no method that can show you that?

**Nm:** No, because method is on the level of bodily action or bodily
perceptions, where you\'re just perceiving or going through some
motions. We\'re talking about the intentions behind your actions. So
whatever meditation method/techniques or bodily act you do, you still
have to look at the intention behind that, which means that a
"meditation method" becomes redundant, which means the only necessary
method is your sila and sense restraint. That is the closest to a right
method as you can get.

**Q:** So it\'s not about doing a meditation of observing bodily-touch
sensations or breathing techniques, etc. which will reveal the truth or
remove my craving?

**Nm:** That\'s a completely misplaced effort, because you are looking
in the wrong place. You\'re not seeing your intention to observe
sensations. Your intention is not in the sense of bodily touch or in the
movement of your breathing. Observing bodily sensations, audible
sensations, visual sensations, etc, is an action which is already
intended, which is already "leaned towards and away from" and you\'re
not seeing that, by not seeing that, no amount of engaging in sense
perceptions, will reveal its nature. Otherwise the Buddha would have
given such a method and described it in the Suttas. When they did ask
him about a direct method, he said, a young man develops faith and goes
forth, leaving his household life, he lives restrained by the rules of
*patimokkha*, practices sense restraint, sees the danger in the
slightest fault, moderate in eating and devoted to wakefulness, mindful
and aware, dispelling the hindrances, and practicing jhana.

I remember the first time I read that as a layman, I was also looking
for a method. And I thought, "Well, this instruction is just too
general, why wouldn\'t he just give you a particular recipe on how to
become awakened?", because there isn\'t any, this is the most particular
you can get. If you\'re not seeing it in a direct manner, it\'s just
because of all of the wrong views you are looking with. You need to meet
the Buddha's instruction halfway basically, or even two thirds of the
way to start making sense of it. But if a person doesn\'t change their
views and only adds to the top of their views and notions of what the
practice is, that\'s when you get methods such as modern day vipassana,
visualisation or concentration techniques.

You have to discern the intention behind your action and you can\'t
concentrate on that because it\'s behind your act of concentration. You
can only discern it, you can know it.

**Q:** You can\'t attend to or concentrate on your intention, you can
only be aware of it.

**Nm:** You can be aware in a peripheral background manner, but
attention or concentration in terms of techniques is not the same thing.
People are not aware of the background, when they\'re doing meditation
techniques, quite the opposite, they absorb into the foreground, trying
to narrow things down. They\'re practising a focusing attention exercise
on one thing or the other, which means that there\'s no general
awareness there, and if they hear about 'general awareness', that
becomes a thing which they try to focus on.

Your intentions can only be seen indirectly on the basis of sense
restraint and sila. You can\'t see them indirectly if you\'re
unrestrained or restrained and looking in the wrong place, such as
focusing on objects of your attention.(In both cases your attention is
leaning towards the foreground of senses objects and you are oblivious
to the background) (In that sense common meditation techniques are
redundant)

Having enough clarity generated to the point of being able to fully
discern the background, will not come about if you are not restrained in
virtue and a meditation technique cannot replace that. If you are
restrained in virtue, you don\'t need a meditation technique, because
your intentions will be clear enough for you to then start the work of
bringing about the end of craving by no longer giving in to it.