---
title: Peripheral Awareness
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
layout: post
---

```{=context}
\page [yes]
```

Mindfulness done correctly is when the mind is *anchored* in something.
That something must be a thing that is not directly attended to, but
instead, has to be a *reference point* to the attended thing (hence we
call it "anchor"). If a thing is not directly attended to but there, we
call that thing to be a "background". It's a background to a thing we
attend (which makes that thing a "foreground"). This is the basic
principle of mindfulness, on which we can expand here below.

One begins developing this practice of awareness by being mindful of the
experience as a *whole*. For example, one is mindful of
'being-seated-on-a-chair-reading-a-Dhamma-essay'. That is one's
*situation* at that very time. That is one's experience as a "whole".
This is always the necessary starting point. What is very important is
to prevent the tendency to become absorbed in one particular thing.
(Feeling, sensations or perception, and similar). Instead, one has to
broaden the mindfulness and become aware of the *generality* of one's
current situation, without losing the sight of the particular
either.[^135]

Of course, the attempts of discerning the background of one's current
experience will not be perfect in the beginning. One will more often
than not fall into a mistake of over-attending one's experience as a
whole. This is a mistake of making that background into an *object* of
one's attention, defining it, clarifying it, trying to keep it in front.
These are all ways of making it a *foreground*, which means that then
something else will be in place of the background.

The natural tendency is to ask "*What* is then the background?". This is
however a wrong question. And it's wrong because we are not concerned
with the *content* of the background (or foreground for that matter),
which would be the answer to "what?". Instead our concern should be with
*nature* of it. So one needs to restrain the tendency to clarify *what*
is that "background", and learn how to start discerning the domain of
it. The domain of the "*periphery*", its nature, in regard to what is
presently *enduring* here.

Thus, something one attends to directly is what a foreground is at the
time. It can be anything that is the current object of one's attention.
That thing has manifested, and it is enduring as such. That's the basic
structural property of one's experience, there is no problem with this.
However, if one wants to develop mindfulness, a step further is
necessary. That step is developing the peripheral "vision" in regard to
that very same foreground object, but *without* making that peripheral
vision the new object by *directly* attending to it. The Buddha referred
to this as "*yoniso manasikara*", which is often translated as "proper
attention". *Yoniso manasikara* is the correct way of attending to the
peripheral. *Manasikara* means "attention". *Yoni* means "womb". So when
a thing is present in the front, in the foreground, its peripheral
background is that very "womb" the thing has "came from", so to speak.
*Yoniso manasikara* is womb-attention, or less literally: a peripheral
attention.[^136]

Thus, the point is to learn *how* to attend. Not so much "what". It's
about discerning the habit of "over-attending" and learning how to not
resort to it. This habit manifests through either indulging or resisting
the object of one's attention. Either way, one is fully concerned with
it. This is why one must stop trying to "observe" one's experience as an
object of one's attention and instead, acknowledge it and let it
*endure* on its own. (Let it persist or
change-while-remaining-the-same-thing). Once the arisen experience of
one's attention is allowed to be, then gradually and indirectly,
discerning of the peripheral *domain* can manifest.

The most practical way of practising this is through mindfulness of body
postures. That's why these things are often called "foundations" of
mindfulness, or "anchors" or "reference points". It's because they are
*always* rooted in the *background*. (E.g. foundations are *under*; an
anchor is at the *bottom*; the reference point is at the *distance*.
Under, bottom, away... it means 'not-here-directly-in-front-of-me'). So
for example: while I'm seated, I'm reading an article, actively
scrolling through the pages, paying attention to what's being said in
it. Things I'm "doing", like reading, writing, talking, etc. are things
I'm attending to (foreground). And I'm attending to them all *while* I'm
*seated*. That's the reference point that is enough for proper
mindfulness. That is what's the background here. Yet, if I switch my
attention and start attending to the fact that I'm sitting on the chair,
then the body posture of "sitting" ceases to be the background in my
experience. Why? Because I've broken the relationship of "referencing".
There is no more "*while*", since I forgot about the reading, and became
concerned with sitting. When this happens, one can either go back to the
original foreground, or discern the newly present background in regard
to the attended experience of sitting. The new background will have to
be something even more *general* than "sitting posture". And the more
general thing in that case is nothing other than awareness of the "body
there".[^137]

Body postures are more general than attending to a particular action or
perception. But having a "body *there*" is even more general than the
postures. Because to be walking, sitting, standing or lying down, one
needs to have a *body* in the first place. That's why one can also use
the knowledge of "there is body", as the peripheral anchor for one's
daily actions and experiences. The presence of one's living body is a
fundamental requirement for *any* action. We can go even higher (even
more general), as we mentioned earlier, and develop awareness of the
phenomenon of Earth, Water, Fire or Air. Or even further, in the
practice of more refined *kasinas*, as described in the *Suttas*. The
point is that the principle remains the same.

We need to stress that this is something that requires *development*.
It's not something that can be just "figured out", or read once and made
sense of. It requires a diligent *repetition* of "stepping back" when
over-attending one's experience as a whole. And then "stepping in" when
ignoring it (under-attending it, forgetting about the background). So,
it takes time and effort in order for it to be correctly *discerned* and
*recognized*.

The problem with common practice of meditation is that people are
encouraged to get "absorbed" into the particular "meditation object".
The practice becomes a form of focusing on the foreground at the expense
of everything else. And not just that, people end up focusing on the
objects twice as hard. This is because their view of meditation is to
look and *perceive* the "momentary" foreground (the whole idea of
"observing '*sensations*'"). Then within that they try to perceive even
more *particular* things. So it's not just the *domain* of the
foreground, but the content proliferates further too. In cases like
this, the 'background', as a foundation of mindfulness that needs to be
understood, is even further obscured.

The 'reference point' means being aware of something, without having to
actively think about it. That's the basic principle of mindfulness. This
should *always* be the basis for *samadhi* (according to the
*Suttas*).[^138] That is why, if mindfulness and
awareness is practised correctly, it will result in *knowledge* of the
nature of things. The very definition of knowledge is knowing something
without having to actively think about it. The knowledge reappears when
it is attended to. One knows what one knows. This is the important point
because this type of mindfulness of the background that's simultaneous
with the presently arisen phenomenon[^139], results in
the establishment of mind (*samadhi*) that transcends *sensuality* and
*ill will*. The whole domain (scope) of
unwholesome.[^140] And that's why that *samadhi*
further results in complete knowledge of liberation.

The catch is in persistent effort of repetition of *learning* how to
*attend* to things *peripherally*, without having to "directly" look at
them. For a mind affected with *avijja*, the "direct look", the
"*ayoniso manasikara*" always involves *appropriation* and the
*Self-view*. And "learning to attend" things peripherally can be done on
many different "bases" or "domains" that are structurally present as the
background of our attended experience. These domains are the domain of
feelings, thoughts, and even one's intentions (bodily, verbal and
mental).

For example, being aware of the *general feeling* present, without
trying to *perceive* it as "sensation" (i.e. "in" the body), is another
way of establishing the proper mindfulness.

Or, something we often talk about, taking up of personal
*responsibility*. If one takes it up, then no matter what the engagement
with the particular task is, the background of it (the "womb" of that
engagement) is one's own *choice* to engage with it in the first place.
Taking up responsibility, means becoming aware of the "background"
choices one makes throughout one's life.[^141]

Furthermore, taking up responsibility for what one has chosen, a person
gets to maintain that mindfulness through the very particular actions
one is doing on account of it. And that mindfulness of responsibility is
not something they would have to perpetually think about. No, that
mindfulness is being *felt* instead. (That's why the initial awareness
of *any* form of responsibility is always *unpleasant* and concerning).

The choice behind one's actions is a general *unity*, a *context* of
one's acts, that is present in each of those acts individually. Present
as a peripheral background. It is because of this that *sila* or
*virtue* is a necessary prerequisite for understanding. When one's
actions are based on *distortions* of priority (particular sensuality
*over* general nature of choice regarding it, for example), one cannot
see a clear responsible background while engaged in such pursuits. No
perspective, so to speak. So, first actions that maintain absorptions
with particularity must be divorced from the unwholesome domain. Then
they must be further restrained, by avoiding the distracting of oneself.
By undoing wrong way of attending to things. By not cultivating improper
attention. Only then can one begin to discern the *signs* of the
peripheral, characteristics of the background hereby discussed. Only
then one will be able to "grasp the sign of one's mind" or
*cittanimitta*. A necessary requirement for the arising of the Right
view.

[^135]: This is why the correct practice of mindfulness results in higher
    establishments of mind (*samadhi*). For example, this is where mind
    surmounts the fundamental "generality" of form, by the way of
    surmounting the generality of earth, water, fire and air. Also,
    there is a reason that the order of elements always stays the same.
    They are have a particular structural order of their generality. And
    one can discern them in that order only.

[^136]: That's also why this type of attention is said by the Buddha to be
    one of the necessary pre-requisites for the arising of the Right
    view.

[^137]: > "...or mindfulness that "there is body" is simply established in
    > him to the extent necessary for the final knowledge."
    
    > -- MN 10, *Satipatthana Sutta*

[^138]:  > "Unification of mind, friend Visakha, is samadhi. The four
    > foundations of mindfulness are the basis of samadhi. The four
    > right kind of striving are the equipment of samadhi. The
    > repetition, the development and cultivation of those same states
    > is what development of samadhi is."
    
    > -- MN 44, *Culavedalla Sutta* 

[^139]: Experience as a whole, the
    'foreground-without-focusing-on-particular-object-witin-it'.

[^140]: Sensuality is *always* concerned with the particular content of the
    experience. Particular *sight*, *sound*, *smell*, *taste*, *touch*.
    Thus, mindfulness of the peripheral domain to the particular
    foreground, can result in overcoming it.

[^141]: Hence the fully developed knowledge that came from the Right View,
    results in freeing an individual from his actions (*kamma*). Full
    understanding of the nature of the "choice" as "peripheral", removes
    the gratuitous *assumption* (*upadana*) of necessity of the
    "Chooser" i.e. the Self. Understanding the choice or intentional
    intention (*cetana*) frees oneself from choosing (i.e. acting).
