---
title:  168hh- The Contradiction in the Unwholesome
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
date: 2021-06-17
layout: post
---

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200804 - 168hh - Looking for a bigger picture importance of precepts.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/88)

**Nm:** Unwholesome things are unwholesome because in themselves they
contain a contradiction or a discrepancy.

### Killing

**Q:** You can see the same thread of contradiction running through
every unwholesome action. Take killing, for example, one takes away the
life of another which does not belong to you.

**Nm:** It\'s a contradiction. You\'re destroying something that\'s not
yours as if it were yours. Also, life is implicitly valuable for
everyone, even for people who don\'t necessarily have a view that life
is worth living. Still, they can only do that based on being alive. That
means that life in itself is taken at its face value, and it has value.
So, you as the one who implicitly values life, destroying the life of
another, that\'s another discrepancy of the values i.e while you value
life you are now acting towards destroying life intentionally.

**Q:** You are trying to conceal that fundamental value.

**Nm:** Not explicitly. No, that\'s implied in it. You might not even
completely think about it at all. You\'re not intentionally trying to
conceal it.

**Q:** We are then born into that kind of concealment, we are born not
knowing wholesome and unwholesome.

**Nm:** You\'re not born with fully developed concealments. But as the
Buddha said, all the underlying tendencies for those concealments are
present in a newborn. So they will grow and develop.

**Q:** The ignorance that we start with, it\'s not something that we
decided to do.

**Nm:** Basically ignorance is part of the way you attend to things.
It\'s implicit in it. You know, when you attend to something, you
automatically have to ignore something else, you cannot attend to
everything. That\'s the principle of avijja, in other words, by looking
this way, you will not be able to look at the other way simultaneously.
So which is the most common way that people choose to look? Well, it\'s
the way of least resistance. It\'s the way of sensuality. It\'s the way
of ill will, it\'s the way of passion, desire, satisfaction. So it\'s
the way of \"with the grain\", \"with the flow\". Simply attending to
that \"way\" means you\'re not attending the other way. You cannot
attend both at the same time. You have to find a good reason to start
looking \"upstream\" and then start swimming upstream, while everything
is trying to pull you downstream.

**Q:** Can you say that, that which is unwholesome is that which goes
against the way things are?

**Nm:** Yes, but I don\'t like using the term \"the way things are\"
because that has been overused and is quite mystified already. It would
be better to say that \"it goes against the universal principles\" i.e
the Dhamma. And you need to understand the Dhamma to know what those
universal principles are. You can have an idea of what nature\'s law is
and then infer from there what is wholesome, but that\'s on the level of
an abstract view, which can correspond to the practical application to
some extent. Some people can have an accurate abstract view but haven\'t
truly understood the nature of wholesome as wholesome.

### Stealing 
**Q:** If we can just go to the next precept, which is to refrain from
\"taking that which is not given\". How is stealing unwholesome?

**Nm:** First of all, you can see that you cannot accidentally break the
precepts. The perception is the fundamental factor. If you perceive that
something is truly yours, and you take it because you perceive it as
yours but it happens not to belong to you, it\'s just a mistake,
there\'s no stealing involved. Stealing requires your intentional effort
to override the truth, which is what the discrepancy is. So intentional
effort to override the value of life, which is implicit, even if you
don\'t think about it, or intentional effort to override the value of
ownership, which is implicit, but you choose to ignore it. That\'s why
these things are unwholesome. If you choose to act with intention of ill
will, desire, carelessness, means you\'re accepting that contradicting
value.

### Sexual Misconduct 

**Q:** The next precept of refraining from sexual misconduct or having
sexual relations with people you shouldn\'t e.g another\'s wife or
underage persons etc, is again misappropriating things that do not
belong to you.

**Nm:** You perceive it as not yours, as something that shouldn\'t be
engaged with, and then you choose to give priority to your desire and
ignore the factual basis of your perception. And why is passion or
desire a contradiction? Why is that desire, a contradiction on the
existential level? What is the discrepancy there? Desire is always
towards sense objects. Whatever you desire, it\'s going to be one of
these six sense objects. Can you have any of those six sense objects
without the senses being there, without the mind being there, can you
have sights without the eye? So what is the nature of the senses?

**Q:** They\'re not mine.

**Nm:** How can you then cultivate the desire for that which you can
only get on account of things that are not yours. The only way you can
cultivate desire towards those sense objects is to take these senses to
be yours, to begin with. So you can\'t have a desire towards sense
objects without implicitly taking up the ownership of the senses. Taking
up what\'s not yours, starts on the level of welcoming desire. Desire
arises and by welcoming it, you take up desire and every value that that
desire implies. The value is that senses belong to you, that they are in
your control, enjoyable, and not dangerous.

**Q:** You\'re acting from a premise that these senses are mine, safe,
secure, and delightful.3

**Nm:** That\'s all implicit. You can\'t ask for the desire to not
manifest itself. You have no say in that. But you have a say in your
ATTITUDE towards the manifestation of desire or ill will. Are you
welcoming it, delighting in it? Are you rejoicing in the prospect of
fulfilling that desire? Even if you practice sense restraint, are you
still entertaining the phenomenon of desire in your experience when
desire manifests? And if you do, that\'s why you\'re still contradicting
yourself on the existential basis because you cannot possibly entertain
the value of desire without implicitly taking up the ownership of the
sense bases. If you stop valuing the sense objects, stop entertaining
desire towards them, you get to uproot the taking up(assumption) the
sense organs as yours.

**Q:** Basically, you have a desire towards sense objects because
you\'ve misappropriated the senses.

**Nm:** Yes, it\'s like a vicious circle. Because you appropriate the
senses, as in you don\'t question your ownership of them, that\'s how
you cultivate desire towards the sense objects. Because you cultivate
desire towards sense objects, that\'s how you appropriate the sense
organs. So one feeds the other. Therefore, first, you need to start
restraining your behavior on account of the desire towards senses
objects, as in you need to start keeping the precepts. And then once
that becomes your norm of behavior, then you can get to see that on the
mental level, you should now stop delighting in it, welcoming it,
flirting with it, even if you know you\'re not going to act physically.
And then eventually, you will dry out from that wetness of desire, and
then you get to see the true nature of those senses which is perilous.

However, you can\'t just say okay, I\'m not regarding my senses as mine
anymore. Because that thought of your senses is a sense object. You
cannot directly experience your sense organs, which is why they always
have implicit ownership that you need to undo indirectly. You can\'t
just decide to let go of them, because you\'re not holding it
intentionally. So, what is the thing that if you let go of will result
in you not having ownership of the sense organs? It\'s the desire
towards sense objects. Letting go of that, you\'re a step closer to
letting go of the sense organs which you cannot perceive, and if you
think you can, that is because you are conceiving them, which is not
what they are.

You get trapped by sense organs because you pick up the bait of the
sense objects. Your desire is you picking up the bait and thus getting
trapped. Therefore, to no longer be trapped, you must simply no longer
pick up the bait, and then INDIRECTLY you will no longer be
appropriating the sense organs as yours. (You cannot directly let go of
sense organs.)

### Lying 

**Q:** The next precept is refraining from misrepresenting the truth.

**Nm:** The fundamental lie is avijja. Would you be able to be
complacent, lazy, dull and careless, if you were placed in a dangerous
situation that you perceive as dangerous? It would be inconceivable for
you to relax on that level, to completely just let your mind melt away
and forget about itself. And yet here you are in the most perilous
situation you can be in, being subject to death, sickness, aging. And
yet you are completely complacent. It\'s the fundamental contradiction,
the hardest one to undo. Because it\'s not as obvious as desire or ill
will.

For example, if you want to do a little experiment, if you\'re not sure
if your existence in itself is dangerous, just lock yourself in a room,
a comfortable room But don\'t engage with any distraction for a day,
switch your phone off, switch everything off, don\'t talk, and don\'t
step outside. Just sit alone on a chair or a bed and stare at the wall.
And let\'s see how long you can do that before you start freaking out on
account of that boredom. So if boredom is not truly dangerous. Why are
you afraid of it? Why do you constantly need something to keep yourself
engaged, to swim so that you don\'t sink? Why are you terrified of
solitude and loneliness? Just think, if you get sick and can\'t move,
can\'t distract yourself with all these things and projects. How will
your mind remain? Will it be unaffected by that or will you start
completely losing it? So let the boredom endure. And it\'s going to turn
into full-blown anxiety and dread, and why is that if existence is not
dangerous and perilous, where does this anxiety come from? Because you
haven\'t done anything by the way. You\'re in a perfectly safe
environment. Locked, nobody can get in, safe as you can be. And yet here
you are freaking out internally. Because that\'s what your existence is,
it\'s all these efforts and actions you do, to enable yourself to ignore
that very nature.

Imagine somebody comes and tells you that you have ten minutes to live.
Would you continue laughing carelessly, watching movies, or playing
games? It will be impossible for you to do that. Because suddenly the
sense of urgency is back, and the only reason a sense of urgency can be
restored is because it\'s always there implicitly. That thread of
anxiety that you can never completely cover-up is for everyone what
human existence is. Only the *Arahant* is completely free from it.

When you are young, healthy, and have all the senses working, it feels
like there\'s no problem. As I said, just do a little experiment, close
yourself in a room for half a day and see what will happen to your mind
when there are no distractions available. And if your mind was
problem-free beforehand, this will not cause any issues, yet it does.
Solitude starts revealing the main motivation for all your various
engagements, which is to cover up your underlying anxiety on account of
your fundamentally uncertain existence.

### Intoxication 

**Q:** The fifth precept, refraining from intoxicants, is unwholesome
because it\'s the basis for carelessness, it\'s the covering up of any
mental clarity that one has.

**Nm:** Yes, can you possibly engage with intoxicating substances
without implicitly endorsing complacency and dullness of your mind?
Inconceivable. I don\'t necessarily mean getting drunk, I mean that
simply by engaging with that substance, to whatever extent, you are
increasing dullness of mind, which always results in increased
heedlessness. Dullness means loss of context, loss of perspective, even
if you\'re not drunk, it\'s still the direction of losing context and
perspective, even if it\'s half a step.

Can you engage with the absolute minimum level of intoxication, without
valuing it, without delighting in the prospect of the dullness of the
mind, preferring the pleasure of numb distraction? Can you be engaging
with that direction of intoxication if you see it as dangerous? Can you
put one foot inside the lion\'s den, when there\'s a chance that the
lion is right there by the entrance? You wouldn\'t flirt with that idea
at all. A little bit of poison is still poison. It doesn\'t affect you
like a lot of poison would, but it\'s still a poison which affects you,
which means that it might be enough to kill you.

Remember you\'re already full of wrong views concerning everything, in
regards to desire, in regards to ill will. For all of that to be undone
there is a lot of work to do, and yet here you are flirting with the
things that directly result in increasing those wrong views. So yes,
literally a glass of wine might be enough to fully cement you in the
wrong view that sensuality is not bad. And because of that, you will not
get the right view and you will remain bound to samsara, for eons to
come. Is the glass of wine worth that risk? Do you really know there is
no risk?

**Q:** When you are intoxicated with life, health, and youth, you don\'t
consider the inherent risk.

**Nm:** Yes, you don\'t consider the context, which is that you might be
healthy, alive, and young now, but can you guarantee that there will be
the next breath? No, you have no guarantee of that. When you fall away
from recognizing that context, you go into the direction of desire
towards sense objects, towards intoxication with the world. You cannot
have both, you cannot be absorbed in/ intoxicated with the world while
maintaining a clear, dispassionate, mindful perspective. Thinking that
you can is the result of your intoxication with the sensual world.
Thinking that you are seeing clearly while you are intoxicated is a
contradiction.


