---
title:  183hh- Becoming An Immovable Object
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
date: 2021-04-13
layout: post
---

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20201117 - 183hh - Becoming an immovable object.pdf) [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/76)

**Q:** What is the middle way between asceticism and sensual indulgence?
Is it the practice of enduring (neither giving into or denying)
thoughts?

**Nm:** That\'s the way to cultivate the middle way.

From the context of thoughts or mental images that appear in people\'s
minds, sensuality would be the acting out of thoughts immediately
without reflection, without sense restraint, or any consideration.
That\'s pretty much what defines sensuality.

> \"Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> Not the various things in the world;\
> Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> The various things just stand there in the world;\
> But the wise get rid of desire therein.\"

> -- AN 6.63

The nature of thought (mind state) might be sensual, but when it\'s
paired with acceptance, welcoming, and delight in it, there\'s immediate
acting towards it. The opposite way would be, for example, if you see
sensuality as a problem and then you try to deny those thoughts. You see
that you act out of sensual thoughts and then think that not having
those thoughts would be good and so you try to prevent them from
arising, which is the other extreme of self-mortification, the ignoble
way of self-torture. It\'s ignoble because it cannot bring about the
result you want. Trying to resist thoughts is not bad but denying
thoughts requires you to take things further. One thing is resisting
thoughts, allowing them to endure, and resisting you acting out of them.
Another thing is to think that you mustn\'t have these thoughts, to
begin with, that would be you over-reaching because that\'s not up to
you. That\'s why giving into those thoughts or trying to deny them, you
remain equally ignorant, bound with sensuality and self-mortification,
you are bound with the bait that Mara has laid down. So how do you then
not go into these extremes?

Sensuality and self-mortification can result in extremes but in
themselves, it\'s relatively subtle in the beginning. You denying
thoughts is not exactly extreme, yet it partakes in the direction of
self-mortification, it shares the same nature. All of the acts of
self-mortification that would come later on in someone\'s practice, of
such a kind, would all be sharing the same principle in common, which is
a denial of the arisen thought, \"I mustn\'t have it!\", and initially
the Buddha was the same when he was trying to find a way out.

There is no end to asceticism, you can always do more, even to the point
where the Buddha tried to stop breathing so that he wouldn\'t have
unwholesome thoughts arise, but he realised that that would not work
either.

People tend to dismiss EXTREME asceticism or extreme sensuality and
think as long as they do not commit to those extremes then they are in
the middle. No, if you are either overly accepting your thoughts or
denying them, you are not in the middle. The middle way is the way that
can discern the arisen thought, not act out of it, and not try to get
rid of it. Which means that the mind already needs to have been
developed sufficiently enough to allow the thought to endure without
jumping into the action on account of it. Therefore sense restraint
needs to be developed beforehand, virtue needs to be established because
that will give you a certain space to not automatically act out of
thoughts.

**Patient Endurance Allows For Wisdom.**

The beginning of right discernment is being able to allow thoughts to
endure without welcoming them. Thoughts arise on their own, that\'s the
whole point, and thinking that you can deny them already implies a wrong
view, whereby you think that you are in charge of those thoughts, or
that you are responsible for their arising. No, you are responsible for
their acceptance. You are responsible for delighting in them and acting
out of them. If you don\'t do these things and thoughts are still there,
that\'s not on you, but the reason why people still want to get rid of
those thoughts is because it\'s unpleasant to allow thoughts to endure
without acting out of it. It\'s easier to act towards sensuality and
it\'s easier to deny. The hardest thing is to allow it to endure and not
act out of it, because it can endure for days, and when you\'re not
acting out of it, that whole pressure and emotional charge is there.
It\'s easier to get angry and lustful, just to say yes or no, act and
express yourself quickly to deal with the pressurizing thought. It\'s
easier, but again, the only reason you are doing that is because the
endurance(manifestation) of the thought is first, which means that no
matter how much you try to give in or deny it, you always do it on
account of that which you are not in control of, and which bothers you.
In other words, all of your efforts to act towards or deny the thought
are futile.

If you want to deal with the painfulness of an enduring thought, when
you are not acting out of it, you need to allow it to endure so that you
can understand it.

There is no wisdom arising on account of sensual behavior or
self-mortification (indulgence and denial) because you just lock into a
direction and that\'s your principle of action, i.e if it arises you
just say yes yes yes, or no no no, and then you conflate that with the
idea of purity which makes you feel extra superior on account of your
great determination. And then you will realize that even the unwholesome
states that you wanted to abandon, the conceit, ego, pride, get
amplified instead of abandoned. So whatever the thought is, whatever the
state of mind is, you have to allow it to endure, and just ask yourself,
whatever state of mind you are now in, did you create it, did you press
an internal button which produced it? No, but because you think it is
yours, you try to engage in it or deny it. The problem is not in those
thoughts arising, the problem is in you acting out of it, either towards
or against, either way, you are affirming its grip on you, by your
attempts to wiggle out of it.

Allowing thoughts to endure without acting out of them, would be the
beginning of the middle way. Also, that\'s exactly what grasping the
\'signs of the mind'- *cittanimitta* means in the suttas. Grasping the
sign of your mind for what it is, its nature, the way it endures. The
reason why people cannot grasp the *cittanimitta*, the prerequisite for
the right view, is because they either act toward or deny their mind. So
you\'re either under-doing the restraint or over-doing the restraint,
but you are not doing the restraint properly either way.

**Q:** When you are watching the breath and a lustful thought arises,
some tend to think 'I must get rid of this' therefore I must just watch
my breath so that I don\'t have lustful thoughts, and if I can keep
watching my breath I will never have lustful thoughts again.

**Nm:** That\'s like the deer herd that ran on top of the mountain (Mn
25). They are not experiencing any temptation from the bait, for some
time, but they are not growing wisdom regarding overcoming the bait
altogether, which means when their food on the mountain runs out, or
when you can\'t sustain watching your breath 24/7, something will have
to pull you out one way or another, and then you are back to where you
were before, because no wisdom was developed, which would have created
an elevated ground for you to be on. When the suitable environment,
which was allowing you to not engage with the bait disappears, you get
trapped once again because your freedom from the bait was only
circumstantial.

By the way, there is no problem if you have lustful thoughts when you
are breathing and you attend to the breath. You can do that because it
is a matter of choice. The problem is when people choose to attend the
breath with the view of denying the thought. Not as in 'I will attend my
breath and allow these thoughts to endure in the background of my mind
because it has arisen on its own, I didn\'t invite it, I will allow it
to endure as long as it wants, I will not give attention to it, I will
attend to my breath\", but rather one should not think \"I will attend
to my breath so that this thought is gone, I will do away with it, it
doesn\'t exist!!!!\", if you think like that, you are engaged with the
thought and your breath is secondary because this lustful thought is now
your main concern. Like in the suttas when Mara comes and tries to tempt
the Buddha. The Buddha can\'t chase him away, he can, however, not
provide Mara with a basis on which to latch, and that\'s when Mara
leaves him alone. Thoughts of sensuality arise like flies buzzing around
you but unless you provide something suitable for them to land on, they
will just buzz off elsewhere.

In the suttas, it says that one should sometimes not pay attention to
unwholesome thoughts (MN 20), but you shouldn\'t do that at the expense
of denying their presence, which has arisen on its own. And it\'s
because they are present, that you don\'t give them your attention. I
wouldn\'t have to 'not give you my attention' if you are not here. So if
I am instructed to not give you my attention, it means I KNOW that you
are here, and for the duration of, or endurance of your presence here, I
will not give you my attention, but I will not pretend that you don\'t
exist in the hopes that you will disappear, that\'s just wishful
thinking and you are just denying the presence of the thing which you
had nothing to do with. That\'s how Mara traps you, affirming or denying
is his domain.

**Q:** Is it about being equanimous regarding a lustful mind state?

**Nm:** That would be the outcome of cultivating the correct attitude
long enough, whereby Mara will leave you alone. The pressure will not be
able to overwhelm your mind, but not if you just cultivate sense
restraint by itself. That\'s just the necessary basis to see the middle
way, the basis for you to stop denying thoughts/ states of mind, but
instead allow them to endure so that you become stronger than those
states, so to speak. Through having them endure and not acting out of
them, not losing your sense restraint, and not trying to deny that which
you are restrained against. In other words, cultivating the middle way
will eventually lead to equanimity, immovability, etc.

**Q:** Those mental states will be less intense.

**Nm:** Yes, but that\'s more of the side effect. Your concern should be
that 'you are not moved by those states even if they last forever'. As
the Buddha said \"be like earth, water, fire, air, that are not affected
by things that are thrown on them, etc...\"(MN 62)

If you want to make that a practice, that is done on the level of the
mental states, ask yourself \"What mood am I in? How is that mood
affecting my action? Am I lashing out? am I binge eating? Am I
irritated? Am I seeking sensuality? Am I express ing these things? Am I
being moved by these states of mind? If yes, that means I do not see the
mind for what it is, I don\'t see its nature, I am not grasping the sign
of the mind correctly. The sign of the mind is the enduring state of
mind that you didn\'t invite and that you shouldn\'t delight in it, but
just see it for what it is, an enduring phenomenon. When you start
seeing that, you are already understanding the mind to a greater degree.

You will inevitably start doing this practice wrong, but you have to
start somewhere, just don\'t take your starting place at face value,
take it with a pinch of salt, so to speak. Whatever you are doing, even
if it makes sense, don\'t immediately think that you are right, just
keep testing to see if it\'s correct, keep reflecting on just how
perturbed you are when lustful thoughts arise. Remember, when you do
start you will be starting on your own terms, which is the wrong way to
start, but you have no other way than that, but you have to start
somehow. You don\'t have to fabricate your experience to contemplate it
but rather, it\'s more like just finding the state of mind that\'s
already there.

You want to remove this idea that you are \'doing\' the observation of
the mind and start seeing the mental states as already there. Why are
you even able to observe a mind of lust or anger? Because the mind is
already that, you find it there already enduring as such. So whether you
are doing awareness of mental states or not, doesn\'t matter, what
matters is not losing that peripheral state of mind that\'s enduring,
whether you look at it or not.

**Q:** What to do when you have a peaceful state of mind?

**Nm:** You can do the same. Don\'t be negligent, or distract yourself
from it. If it\'s peaceful, then question it also, \"Did I create that
peace, do I know where it came from and when it will go?\" No, I am
subjected to it. It\'s agreeable and so let me not delight in that
agreeability of mind, so that when that changes I will not be affected
by it, and then equally when the state of mind is disagreeable, you will
not crave against it, which means it\'s not affecting you much, which
means you don\'t have to be fretting over it, trying to get rid of it.
And that\'s the problem, that it\'s affecting you, not that the state of
mind arose.

**Q:** The goal then is to not be affected by any state of mind\...

**Nm:** \...And seeing that the state of mind is discerned on the
peripheral level, not on the level of your attention. The mind is on the
level of sense organs, not sense objects. What you attend is sense
objects, sights, sounds, smells, taste, touch, thoughts, but the state
of mind is what\'s peripheral to that. For example, you can\'t have
angry thoughts if the mind is not angry. If you have angry thoughts,
then you can know that the state of mind which endures is a state of
anger, and at first, it will feel ambiguous because you want to have
things clear cut, where you can easily attend to it, but that\'s the
behavior of the untrained mind. Training the mind to the sight of the
peripheral image of the mind is what developing cittanimitta is i.e
seeing the mind for what it is, without over attending it, without under
attending it, and forgetting about it.

**Q:** If you cannot see it, then you cannot endure it.

**Nm:** Exactly, not seeing it means that you are either resisting it or
indulging it. If you have a view that you shouldn\'t be enduring the
mind, you will never see it, as in if you have the view that you should
be denying those thoughts, that represent the state of mind behind them,
you will not be able to endure it because your view is to not endure it.
Or if you have a state of mind that you habitually act out of, again
it\'s because you cannot endure it. Even if you cannot attend properly
in that peripheral manner to your state of mind (*yonisomanasikara*),
the only way that you would be able to do so is if you start enduring
whatever emotional mood you are in, not acting out of it and not trying
to get rid of it.

Sensuality is bad, so don\'t act out of it, but that doesn\'t mean that
you try and remove the thoughts that are there, because that means
you\'re engaging with it. You need to become immovable regarding that
which moves you, not try to get out of the whole situation and try to
move that which moves you. That\'s impossible, because how can you go
out and move that which moves you without being moved.

The only way to become immovable/ unaffected is to stop interfering with
that which disturbs you and stop being moved by it while it\'s there.
You are moved, by acting out of it or trying to get rid of it. So
allowing thoughts/ state of mind to endure, if they are pleasant, then
the endurance will be manifested through you NOT acting towards that
pleasure, and if it is unpleasant, the endurance will be manifest
through you NOT trying to get rid of it. That's the middle way.


