---

[[HOME]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/index) [[TRANSCRIPTIONS]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/summarized_talk_transcriptions/index)

---

169hh- The Context Of Your Suffering
------------------------------------

MN 121:

> \"His mind enters into that perception of forest and acquires
> confidence, steadiness, and inclines towards it. He understands thus:
> \'Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of
> village, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might
> be dependent on the perception of people, those are not present here.
> There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the
> singleness dependent on the perception of forest.\' He understands:
> \'This field of perception is empty of the perception of village; this
> field of perception is empty of the perception of people. There is
> present only this non-emptiness, namely, the singleness dependent on
> the perception of forest.\' Thus he regards it as empty of what is not
> there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is
> present thus: \'This is present.\' Thus, Ananda, this is his genuine,
> unperverted, pure, emptiness.\"

You can use the perceptions of the forest to establish your mind so that
you\'re not bothered by anything in the village. It\'s not the actual
perceiving of the forest or staring at a forest and repeating to
yourself that it\'s a forest, which is usually the popular way of doing
meditation. It\'s quite the opposite. It\'s about being able to
establish the perception of the forest when you\'re not in the forest.
That\'s how it\'s done rightly. Which means it\'s not an actual
perceiving on the level of your five senses, it\'s on the level of the
mind, which you discerned and became familiar with, while you were in
the forest.

Your mind is then established upon a context (peripheral awareness), of
the circumstances and environment which provides a basis for more
particular action. So even though you might be in the village, if your
mind refuses to abandon the context of the greater forest, your time in
the village, is only going to be minimal because your mind inclines
towards the context which it has developed, which happens to be the
forest.

If you develop the context of the forest, no particular sight, sound,
smell, taste, touches from the village will be able to affect you,
because the mind still perceives itself based on the context of the
forest. But if you get careless and forget about protecting the greater
context, you will start giving into particular sight, sound, smell,
taste, touches in the village, you will drop off from the context of the
forest and your senses will pull you all over the place. So, once you
are established upon the greater context of the forest, all you need to
do is guard your senses on a particular basis as in, just don\'t
intentionally go with the unwholesome, and the context of the forest
will be maintained.

If you understand this principle, you can go even further, for example,
what\'s an even greater context than the context of the forest? When you
look higher, you can find or uncover (not create) the context of the
earth, planet earth, element of earth, call it whichever you want,
whether you\'re in the forest, whether you\'re in the town, you are on
earth. But as I said, to truly start developing the context of the
earth, you will need serious renunciation concerning particular things
in your environment. How can you develop or transcend a greater context,
when you still refuse to let go of the lesser? If you develop a mind
upon the context of/sign of earth, it would result in you not even
regarding your own body as belonging to you. And that\'s why the Buddha
encouraged it. Contemplating the four elements will result in dispassion
towards this particular manifestation of material form which is within
the greater context of earth.

Whenever you look at this body, it\'s made of the same elements that
everything else in the world is composed of, which means, all of that is
inferior to the great basis of the context of earth that provides these
elements. So I\'m saying this because sometimes people can think that
simply by thinking about the great earth, they\'re developing the
context, but you will know you\'re developing the context, when concern
for your own life and body, senses failing, sickness and so on,
disappears. In that sense, you could see how the context determines the
extent of your perception. The extent to which the perception of the
earth is developed defines everything particular that comes your way as
to whether you\'re going to be affected by it or not.

You can continue to develop even more refined perceptions than the
earth, such as water, fire, air, the four colors, the infinite space and
consciousness which is the most refined of them all, because it\'s the
context of simple presence, whether it\'s suffering that\'s present,
happiness, perception of the village, etc, all have in common,
'presence', it has arisen.

But you don\'t have to develop (discern clearly) all these different
extents/contexts, the extent of earth can be enough for final
liberation. Because to properly develop the context of the earth, you
will have to abandon everything inferior to it, such as any sense of
ownership concerning this particular insignificant little body. You can
see how all these great mountains here are already greater than your
body. They\'re going to be here longer than you. They\'ve been here
longer than you ever will be. Yet, it\'s through not seeing that
context, not allowing it to endure, not knowing how to maintain it in
the background of your mind, why you get pulled with particular senses,
perverting the whole picture, whereby you are the center, you are the
context.

For an unenlightened mind, the five modes of being or the contexts of
the five hindrances, determine the particular actions. Would you be able
to engage with sensuality, if the context of sensuality is not pushing
you that way? If you haven\'t given in to the pressure of the context of
sensuality, would you be deciding the particular acts towards
sensuality? No.Â But then at the same time, if you were not doing the
particular acts of sensuality, would that context be maintained? No,
because it needs maintenance. You need to be engaging in sensuality to
maintain sensuality. That\'s why sense restraint has to come first. You
stop maintaining it so that you can discern the general Nature of things
which are general perceptions that you can use to abandon inferior ones,
and they don\'t require your doing. 'The Nature of things' does not
require you for it's maintenance, unlike the hindrances.

What is the Nature of things? It\'s the context of things. And the
Dhamma is the universal context. And what\'s the most universal about
anything? It\'s that it has arisen on its own, that it cannot provide
that lasting satisfaction of ownership and because of that, it cannot be
owned. Anicca, dukkha, anatta are universal contexts. The highest
context is, 'I can\'t own anything even if I want to'. And that context
can become your mode of being through the clarity of comprehension you
developed regarding it. Nothing particular then will be able to sway you
or disturb you. Because you don\'t even own this body, let alone
anything that can come through the senses.

So, for example, if you truly understood the fundamental context of
anicca, regarding everything that has a nature to manifest that\'s
*sotapatti*, which is the understanding that "whatever has the context
of arising, because of that, has the context of cessation", and the
context of non-ownership, non-appropriation, indifference, dispassion,
all these other contexts come from that realized/developed fundamental
context of anicca.

How can you discern/develop/realize such a context? The only method is
learning what the context is and then making an effort to discern it.

---

[[HOME]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/index) [[TRANSCRIPTIONS]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/summarized_talk_transcriptions/index)

---
