67hh- Comprehending The Mindfulness Of Breathing And Death Contemplation
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. Mindfulness of Breathing

**Ven. Thaniyo:** I wanted to ask about mindfulness of breathing, and
how that should be done. You can read the sutta over and over again and
try to follow some sort of method, step-by-step. "You breathe in, then
you breathe out. I'll breathe in, thinking about my body."

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** "I attend to this, I attend to that. I do this, I do
that."

**Ven. Thaniyo:** And you can actually run through all those steps
forward, backward, however you want...

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** And still not do the mindfulness of breathing.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So what is best to do?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, as the name itself says, it's
mindfulness---mindfulness of breathing. In order to do mindfulness of
breathing, you need to know what mindfulness is.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So, what is mindfulness?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Mindfulness, if done rightly, is effortless.
Mindfulness is not something you can do. Mindfulness is something you
discern on account of the presently enduring things―experience as a
whole, that includes feelings, body, etc. There are many different ways
you can establish mindfulness, but the principle of mindfulness is the
same. It's to be discerned.

So what is it that you discern in order to become mindful? Well, for
example, you discern your presently enduring situation. So you have an
option: you can be absorbed with the presently enduring
situation---something can take 100% of your attention, i.e. you're
dealing with this problem or looking at this or doing that; but
including self-awareness into whatever you're doing, that's already a
step closer to the proper mindfulness. And that's not something you can
do, it's more like an attitude you can have in regard to things you do.
That's why, fundamentally, a meditation "method" is inherently wrong
from the point of view of mindfulness---because you can't be doing the
mindfulness. Yet, as the Buddha said, meditation is nothing other than
the unshakeable, imperturbable establishment of mindfulness. So if
you're not doing mindfulness from the start, how can you magically
establish it through something you do, some methods or repetitions? It's
a recognition of your situation while at the same time, simultaneously
with that recognition, you are in the situation. In other words, you can
be sitting on a chair now, and with a corner of your eye, with the back
of your mind, you're aware of that. That doesn't mean you need to stand
up or lay down or start walking in order to know that you were seated on
the chair. That's why the bodily postures or just awareness of the body
is so fundamental. So mindfulness done properly means, basically,
awareness of your situation, whether it's established upon the body or
feelings or the state of minds (moods), it's established in that
background, so you're not attending it. I don't have to keep sitting
here thinking: "I'm seated... I'm seated... I'm seated". I don't need to
keep repeating that to myself. Why? Because I already know that I'm
seated, even if I don't think about it. So if you were to ask me "what's
your body posture?", I'll immediately say "I'm seated". And that's what
you want to tap into, so to speak. The proper development of mindfulness
is tapping into what you already know. It's not doing what you think you
must be doing. "I'm seated... I'm seated... I'm feeling the chair... I'm
feeling the chair... My legs are folded... I'm feeling the floor".
That's all a result of you already knowing that you're seated, that's
not your sitting. In other words, whether you're attending to your feet,
your back or whatever else is going on while you're seated, that's
secondary to the fact that you're already seated, and you already know
that you're seated. So instead of giving in to that thinking of "I'm
doing this... I'm doing this"---almost like exercising your sense of
control over your meditation technique---you want to recognize that you
already know what you're doing, and then just try not to forget that
little bit, that one percent, that one grain. Don't forget what you
already know, which means you don't need the active effort of reminding
yourself that you're seated. All you need to do is just keep a corner of
your eye on the fact that you already know that you're seated. And how
do you know? Because you're seated. So that knowledge doesn't come from
you, it's just a recognition of how things are. That's why through that
mindfulness you learn how to discern how things are. That's why that
type of mindfulness will result in discerning impermanence, suffering,
lack of control... all of that. But it won't result in that if you do it
on your own terms, which is thinking: "This is what I'm doing, this is
my meditation... I'm touching... feeling... sitting". That's basically
you doing what you think you should be doing, but the fact is that a
puthujjana already starts with a wrong view, which means whatever he
thinks he should be doing, he will be doing it with a wrong view. That's
why you can't have too much mindfulness either---because it's not doing.
It's the recognition of what you already know, and that knowledge is not
on you.

The same applies in regard to body postures or in regard to the
presently enduring feeling. Again, that's something you already know, so
if I ask you how do you feel, you might think about how you feel in this
particular regard, but if I ask you how do you feel overall---Is it OK?
How is your mood, generally?---you'll immediately know whether it's
"plus" or "minus", so to speak. Whether it's OK or whether it isn't OK,
whether it's neither. So it's tapping into what you already know, and
you already know it because it's present on its own terms. Feeling is
there enduring, whichever it is. And it's because of you not keeping a
corner of your eye on what you already know that you get distracted,
pulled by sensuality, ill-will, reacting, causing more trouble for
yourself, all these things.

That's why people are afraid to be alone as well, because they're
dependent on something to take away their attention, have something to
attend to, including their meditation technique, and they don't stay
with what they already know because it's frightening. Initially, at
least. If you were to just not do anything, including your meditation
technique, the pressure is going to start building up. It is about
solitude, not doing anything. Doing is required for the maintenance of
your being. That's why many people depend on activities of all sorts.
Yes, you can have a good activity, bad activity, less bad activity, but
overall, you depend on the activity. But mindfulness is not an activity!
That's why you cannot have too much of it, and that's why you can
actually develop wisdom on account of it if you start discerning it
rightly. And that's why you need to know what mindfulness is in order to
do it rightly, not just saying: "OK, I'm mindful now". You can't start
perfectly, you can't start rightly from the beginning, but you can
certainly arrive at it if you don't take for granted what you think
mindfulness is as mindfulness. You realize: if I were to know what
mindfulness is, I would have at least the Right View. I would be at
least a sotāpanna. So if I'm not a sotāpanna, that means I don't quite
know what mindfulness is, so whatever I think mindfulness is, I must
upgrade. Through that, I must discern it further. Either way, it's a
win-win. If you already know what mindfulness is, great. Doing more of
it cannot bring any harm. If you don't know what mindfulness is, and
then you end up doing more, and you understand what mindfulness is, you
win again. So you've nothing to lose by regarding yourself as not
knowing quite what mindfulness is, or by investigating further.

The only thing you have to lose is your vanity and conceit that made you
believe you already understood it, and that it's already helpful,
already works and so on. Because if it does, you wouldn't have a problem
upgrading it or pushing it further. Because if it truly works, it will
stand that test---nothing will happen to it. But the fact that some
people might be defending their meditation technique and get very touchy
over it or over their practice of mindfulness means there's passion
invested in it---there's conceit and vanity invested in it. And that's
not mindfulness, then.

Now that we clarified what mindfulness is, we come to mindfulness of
breathing. You can do the breathing, but you can't do the "mindfulness"
in "mindfulness of breathing". In other words, saying mindfulness of
breathing means knowledge of breathing, knowledge of the act of
breathing. And that's why the Buddha says in that sutta, "Knowingly he
breaths in, knowingly he breaths out", that's what his mindfulness is.
It's on that level of that discernment of what's already there. You want
to be mindful of an activity, of something you do. What is the neutral
activity that your body does whether you want it or not? It's breathing
in, breathing out. So you want to be aware of the background of your act
of breathing in and breathing out. In other words, you don't want to be
attending to your breath directly---you want to make it become a
background of whatever your mind is thinking. So you're mindful of
breathing. Or you can even bring it to the foreground if you want, but
again, not in a sense of thinking "I'm perceiving my breath..." or keep
repeating "Nostrils... Nostrils...". Not like that. It still has to be
on the level of that knowledge, because if I ask you now "Are you
breathing?", you will know that you are. You don't have to stop
breathing to give me the answer, you can't even doubt whether you're
breathing or not. You already know that you're breathing. That's what
you want to learn through the mindfulness of breathing---recognition of
what you already know.

And that's not something you always have to maintain, or even can
maintain 100% in front of you, thinking "I'm breathing... I'm
breathing...". Let it drift away without losing sight of it. So, here
you are, sitting, semi-comfortably (not too comfortably because you'll
fall asleep), wide awake, eyes open, and you're breathing. And now know
that you know that you're breathing. That's it. There is no "What do I
do next?". Nothing. So there is the in-breath, there is the
out-breath... there is the in-breath... Either way, they all stand
within that knowledge of "I am breathing".

Whether it's a particular in-breath or a particular out-breath, the
knowledge of breathing remains the same. That's why, then, the Buddha
would say "He would breathe in like this, or like this... Short breath
or long breath..." Point being, the knowledge of that breathing still
stays the same---mindfulness gets established, regardless of the type of
breath or how different it is.

And it's the same principle with mindfulness of the body. When the
Buddha would say "he's mindful of the body like this (standing, sitting,
laying down, etc.), or he's mindful to the extent necessary for final
knowledge that 'body is there'". As in the ultimate background of any of
your activities is the background of your body being present there as a
basis on account of which you can do all these activities and
engagements---feel feelings, perceive perceptions and so on. So if your
mind never forgets that 0.01% of what it already knows of that body
being a necessary basis for it, your mind cannot give rise to avijjā,
whether you recognize it at that time or not doesn't matter---you're
doing it rightly. If you're doing it rightly, the time will come when
you've done it rightly sufficiently that you recognize what you've been
doing rightly.

That's also another reason why nobody can accidentally stumble upon the
Right View. It takes repetition of something you took either through
intellectual discernment or on faith, but you've been doing it rightly,
and when you've been doing it rightly sufficiently, then you recognize
right as right, which is the basic definition of sotāpanna. "He knows
kusala as kusala and akusala as akusala". But he wouldn't have arrived
at it if he hadn't been doing it rightly on account of the utterance of
another and his own faith in it and rightly understanding it on that
intellectual level.

Mindfulness of breathing is the same principle of mindfulness. Breathing
is there. Whether it's a short breath, long breath, quick breath, slow
breath...---breathing is there. And that's what you know. In a way,
breathing is doing, but knowledge of breathing is not doing. Why would
the Buddha then say doing? Because sometimes you want to do something.
You want to replace coarse doing with refined doing. You want to replace
unwholesome doing with wholesome doing, and breathing, being the most
neutral type of doing, is the wholesome doing you can do, because it's
just neutral. Doesn't harm anyone, doesn't harm you, doesn't harm
others. You can develop mindfulness, you can develop knowledge of that
neutral type of doing. And it's also repetitive, which means it doesn't
require your attention as when you're solving a task or doing some
menial work or whatever. It's just breathing---it happens whether you
think about it or not. So you want to discern it on the level of doing,
but discern it, not do it yourself. And how do you do that? Start
breathing, secluded, alone. And ask yourself "Am I breathing right now?
Yes." That's already an increment in the right direction of that
knowledge---you already know you're breathing. Are you still breathing?
Yes. So you still know you're breathing---same breathing, same
knowledge. So you have the same thing enduring now. Now you don't even
have to ask yourself whether you're breathing---you just remind yourself
of what you already know. Yes, you are still breathing. So you can stop
saying "still", you can just stay "Yes, I'm breathing". You don't even
have to say it, you can't think it. When you become familiar with that,
as in knowing that right now, you're still breathing, you can then look
within that.

For example, noticing that the breath is quite slow right now, and you
already know that. You're not doing it, you're discerning what's being
done. Well, you can do it, but you realize that you doing it is
secondary to the discernment of what's being done, and that's
incidentally how you also overcome the nature of action, how you disown
it, but let's not complicate things here. Ask yourself: are you still
breathing? You are. All this time you had the same mindfulness of the
same breathing. Particularly the breath kept going in, going out, but
overall, breathing is there. Body sits, body stands up, body goes, body
lays down---body is there. That's why ānāpānasāti results in the four
foundations of mindfulness being brought to fulfillment, as the Buddha
said. It doesn't result in mystical experiences of meditative lights and
whatnot. It results in clarity of mindfulness. Clarity of mindfulness
results in the Four Right Strivings, the Four Right strivings in the
Enlightenment Factors, and that's it. No other work for you to be done.
Why? Because you brought that knowledge of the nature of things to
fulfillment.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** To the fore.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, yes. So bringing mindfulness of breathing to
the fore means thinking: "OK, am I breathing now? Yes". Then you ask
yourself: "Am I still aware that I am breathing now? Yes. How am I
breathing now? Medium-pace." You can designate it if you want, there is
no right answer to it. There's only right direction or wrong direction,
as in there is only knowledge of it or non-knowledge of it. Ask
yourself: "By the way, how am I feeling while I'm breathing right now?
Overall, fundamentally pleasant. But am I still breathing? Yes." So your
mindfulness is still "concerned" or "anchored", for the lack of a better
word, in the act of breathing. Then you think: "What are the thoughts
that keep popping up in my mind while I'm breathing?" With the same
breathing, same mindfulness, same knowledge of the same breathing. Maybe
you're thinking about how long you can do this, what you do next and so
on. Ask yourself, are those thoughts pleasant or unpleasant? All of this
while you're breathing. You didn't stop breathing while you were
thinking all of this. You haven't lost sight of the breath as the basis
of all these things. Then you recognize, for example, "I'm feeling
doubtful..." Or whatever you discover, as I said, there is no right
answer, there is only losing the sight of your breathing, or not losing
it. Then you might stop thinking about it, and ask yourself: "What's the
state of my mind while I'm breathing? Am I depressed, am I elated, am I
happy, am I sad? What is my mood?" While you're breathing in and
breathing out---all this time. And there you go. You don't need to do
anything else when it comes to mindfulness of breathing. Just keep doing
that, because you'll be developing mindfulness of the body, mindfulness
of feelings, mindfulness of mind and mindfulness of thoughts, which are
the Satipaṭṭhāna. Which is why the Ānāpānasati Sutta (MN 118) says
that---fulfillment of ānāpānasati brings the fulfillment of
satipaṭṭhāna. Nothing else.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** It also says that you get rid of distracting thoughts.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Exactly, because they're all rooted in losing the
sight of that peripheral---in losing mindfulness, basically. Not being
anchored in the recognition of what's peripherally enduring.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** The background.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Exactly, that's lust, aversion... That is a
necessary basis for lust, aversion, and distraction to arise---losing
sight of what you already know, i.e. that certain feelings, body,
intentions, perceptions, etc. are enduring there on their own in that
background. And you actively choose to ignore them. That's why
everybody's fully responsible for their greed, aversion, and delusion.
It's not accidental, it's maintained through your consciously-made
decisions. Not that you fully understand the decisions you're making,
but you are making them. You choose to go down sensuality, you choose to
go down the ill-will---you choose to not say no to those things,
including distraction. That's why all someone who understands that needs
to do is stop delighting in it. He doesn't stop thinking sensual
thoughts or bad thoughts, but he stops delighting in them. That's how
you stop thinking them. Not by preventing them from arising, but by not
fueling them further. If you're just mindful: "I'm seated... I'm
seated...", you're not doing anything. So you could fall asleep or you
could get easily distracted. But breathing is something that's done,
which means it's more active. Yet, at the same time, the principle of
mindfulness is not compromised because it doesn't really take away your
attention. On the basis of knowing that breathing is there, you can
discern what kind of breathing is there. On the basis of knowing that
breathing is there, you can discern what feeling is there. On the basis
of knowing that breathing is there, you can discern what mood is there.
On the basis of knowing that breathing is there, you can discern what
exactly your mind is thinking right now---particular thoughts of this or
that. So on the basis of doing things, you're discerning what's present.
You develop that, that means there will be less and less chances of
being distracted even when you're not practicing actively in meditation.

Whether you're sweeping leaves, walking, sitting, extending your limbs,
that mindfulness pertains to it. Because, again, you don't necessarily
have to think "I'm breathing... I'm breathing...", because you already
know you're breathing. So you just learn, basically, how to tap into
that point of view of that breathing being already there---of that body
being already there---which automatically is something that is not your
point of view, because you are not doing it.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** You could say it comes before your point of view...?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, it comes before your appropriation of the
point of view through action. As in when you think: "I'm looking at
this, I'm doing this, that's my point of view". But the only reason
you're able to do that is because these things are there on their own
enduring already---body is there, feelings are there, perceptions are
there, intentions are there, pretty much. So, again, there are no steps
to mindfulness of breathing---there is mindfulness of breathing and
different aspects of it, of the same principle of mindfulness of
breathing. I'm breathing, I'm still breathing. Still the same
mindfulness, all this time since we've been talking about it. Lots of
things have changed on a particular level---new thoughts, new moods, new
feelings---yet that breathing is still the same. Mindfulness, knowledge
of that same breathing is still there.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** And that breathing is a nutriment, you could say.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** It's a basis, it's a reference point, an anchor---a
background, basically, of everything else more particular.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** And one can see that eventually, at least...

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, there is no "endgame". There is not an "and
then this happens". If you just keep doing mindfulness of breathing,
what's going to happen is everything inferior to it, everything more
particular to it is going to be purified of greed, aversion, and
delusion. It's going to be purified of the basis of non-mindfulness.
Why? Because you're developing the basis of mindfulness. Through doing
it, you're removing the nutriment for all the unwholesome things you've
been doing and deciding to do. Mindfulness of breathing is on the level
of mindfulness of death, or any other mindfulness. That's why the Buddha
taught it as a replacement to Maranānussati. He said, "Instead of that,
because some monks couldn't quite handle it, practice mindfulness of
breathing". But it's the same goal. As in stick with the most
fundamental discernment of things not being in your control, being
already there enduring despite whether you want them or not, whether you
do them or not. It is a death of your sense of self. Death of your
activity, of the notion that you are the one who maintains things, that
you're the one who's in control. That sense just gets completely pushed
out, fades away.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So, when to do mindfulness of death? How is that done?
Where is the death that you're mindful of?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Again, start with mindfulness of the body. You start
seeing the body as a necessary, organic, made out of organs, thing in
the world because of you which you experience the world and everything
in it. All your happiness, sadness, choices and decisions are
inconceivable if the body wasn't there, simultaneously present and
living. Do you have any say in that? That body that you find
there---that you were given, of a certain height, certain complexion,
whatever---can you make it not age? Can you prevent it from getting
sick? Can you ultimately command to it to never die? So those are the
first three basic things that people don't dwell on. That's why the
Buddha said that people are intoxicated with life, intoxicated with
youth, intoxicated with health. You choose to become intoxicated by
refusing to look at the obvious characteristics of it because they're
unpleasant, they fill you with anxiety.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So that's that inevitable possibility of death.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Yes. So once you start recognizing that the presence
of the body is just a necessary nutriment for your experience as a
whole, of any kind, you stop being concerned with the particulars of
that experience, such as: "This bothers me... this makes me happy..."
You realize that it's fundamental nature is undermined by the presence
of the living body. And when that changes, none of it can remain
standing a second longer---none of your feelings or things can stay. So
how can they be yours? And that's basically beginning to acknowledge
death---the destruction that is impending upon the body, upon the
senses. Decay, fading away, disintegration. You think about that, you're
going to be less and less intoxicated with things that come through
it---with your sights, sounds, smells, tastes, touches, thoughts. Why?
Because you recognize that whatever they are, they cannot step outside
of the confinement of the necessary basis of this living body. You
think: "Am I breathing? Yes. What position is the body in? It's seated."
That seated body while you're breathing in and out right now, what are
its characteristics? Just describe it in any terms to yourself. The most
obvious one is it's just there, isn't it? It's living, it's just there.
Do you have a say in any of those characteristics? Can you change them?
Can you tell them to be otherwise? So while I'm breathing, and my body
is seated, that body that I'm discerning---while the breathing is
there---is independent of me, isn't it? I can use it, but I cannot
uphold it---I cannot step outside of it and own it. I cannot tell it
what to do. It's only borrowed, which means everything else that you get
through your body is equally borrowed. And if something is borrowed, is
it right for me to regard it as mine and belonging to me? No. If
something is borrowed, is it right for me to grieve and be sad over it
being taken away? No. You require active ignoring of the fact that
you're not in control in order to grieve over it or be happy over it.
Hence, mindfulness, if done rightly, results in discernment of the
natural principles, which is what Dhamma is---nature. The nature of
things. You could see how different that is from watching your nostrils
and "belly-bhāvanā", or whatever they call it. Completely different.
It's not like thinking: "I'm doing this... I'm feeling my belly rising
and falling, rising and falling..." Zero discernment there. You're just
trying to attend to the momentary presence of things hoping that it will
magically result in knowledge. Looking for meaning results in knowledge.
Delving with the knife, self-questioning, self-interrogation---all the
things the Buddha talks about in the suttas---that's what results in
knowledge.

### II. Death Contemplation

**Ven. Thaniyo:** What about watching someone die?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, with the right attitude, sure, but not without
the right attitude. Watching someone die and then seeing that your
living body---right here, right now---is more related to that dying body
than to your sense of ownership of your body. It's in the same domain as
the other dying bodies, not in the domain of your notion of "this is my
body". That's how you undermine your control, your sense of control. You
can't directly choose to not control it or not own it, but you can
undermine it. Hence, seeing that body is impermanent, because of that,
body cannot be the reason for lust and satisfaction, automatically you
experience that body as "not mine". Sabbe saṇkhārā anicca, sabbe
saṇkhārā dukkha, sabbe dhammā anattā.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So in Dependent Origination, it says "With birth,
aging & death is". So this life---this manifestation of life, what I see
as a whole---all that is subject to fading away.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Yes, but that doesn't need to be your "subject", or
you don't need to be subjected to it. You are subjected to it because
you have appropriated birth, you appropriated the given body, you
appropriated the possibilities of the given body and the senses---you
appropriated it by delighting in it, by pursuing pleasures that are
secondary to it, that come on the basis of it. You can't engage in
sensual pleasure without appropriation of the body, it's inconceivable.
So through engaging in sensual pleasure, you're responsible for your
appropriation of the body. And then, you're liable to whatever that body
is liable to: accidents, aging, death, sickness, all of it. Hence, it's
on you, because you took it, through carelessly pursuing sensuality.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** The body will always age and will always die.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Yes, but if you stop regarding it as yours, it's not
your problem. Inasmuch as these aging trees and other people's bodies
are not your problem because they're not yours. That's why they're not
your problem. It's not that they're not your problem because they're
other people's. They're not your problem because you never considered
other people to be yours---but, incidentally, say if it's your son, your
daughter, your partner, suddenly you're emotionally affected. Why?
Because they're "yours". So yes, you can appropriate other people as
well. Your friends, for example. And that's why you suffer. Not because
they're dying, you suffer because you appropriated them and now you're
feeling that because you're liable to it. So you have a choice. If you
want to be free from suffering, you have to give up all the
appropriation. If you don't want to give up the appropriation, that's
absolutely fine, but then you make yourself liable to suffering. Again,
there is a slight contradiction there, because if you were to be honest
with yourself and ask "Why don't I want to give up all the
appropriations?" you would answer "Because it's unpleasant". So you're
still governed by the same principle of wanting to avoid suffering.
That's why people protect their attachments and appropriations---because
they don't want to suffer. Ironically, you suffer because of that. If
you were to take the initial hit of suffering, ultimately, you can free
yourself from suffering. But if you are too weak to take the initial hit
of suffering, you make yourself liable to it indefinitely. Either way,
nobody wants to suffer. Even people who say "I want to suffer", they
don't. They want to suffer because that provides them pleasure---because
not getting that pleasure means actual suffering. That's why the Buddha
himself could've not taught anything different than suffering and the
cessation of it. Because that is at the root, universally, of every
human, regardless of their culture, education, identity, and whatnot.
That is always the basic principle---avoid pain; have pleasure. Not
having enough pleasure, or getting more pleasure, means avoiding the
pain of not having enough pleasure.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** And what do you think about the common idea where a
lot of people say "I'm not afraid of death"?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, they're not afraid of what they think death
is, which means they don't know what death is. Because only two people
are not afraid of death---a fully enlightened arahant or a fully deluded
puthujjana. But one of them is fully liable to death, another one is
fully free from it. But they both are not afraid of it. One is not
afraid due to the sheer amount of ignorance and not even knowing what
death is, another is not afraid because he's completely overcome it. So
unless you're an arahant, you are afraid of death. And if you don't feel
the fear, it's because you're covering it up. Don't think that death is
what you think death is. Think that death is basically where you can't
get your pleasures, where you can't get the usage of your senses. Find
the fears you have in your life, and you'll see death is at the other
end of them, whatever those fears might particularly be, or whichever
particular way they manifest. Whatever brings people anxiety, death is
on the other side of that. If you say "I'm not afraid of death, that
brings me no anxiety" it's because your idea of what death is is
completely wrong. But something will be bringing you anxiety, and that's
what death is, hence the anxiety.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** One might say: "I'm afraid of losing all my friends".

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Well, there you go. Death is at the other end of
that. That's just a hint of where death is. Not having anyone, being all
alone, losing it all. Or simply losing things that are dear to you. Or
even more simply, as the Buddha said, being separated from the
agreeable, and being united with the disagreeable. That's what suffering
is. And the ultimate suffering is death. You might think: "I'm not
afraid of dying, but I'm afraid of what people think about me". There
you go. Death is basically not having a say in what people will think
about you ultimately. That's the most frightening thing, isn't it? Well,
for those who fear that. Or you might think: "I'm not afraid of dying,
but I'm afraid of losing my wealth, "I'm afraid of losing my family."

**Ven. Thaniyo:** Or "I'm afraid of public speaking".

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** And you ask yourself why is that? Because it's the
ultimate experience of non-control. You have control over your speaking,
but you have zero control over how people will take that---what will
they say? What will they think?

So, ultimately, what is the fear of death? It's fear of the ultimate
non-control. And it's not incidental that one thing or the other will
have to be reminding you of that, because the whole human experience is
about covering the fact that you're not in control, covering the fact
that you're liable to dying, inevitably liable to dying. So all these
things, loss, public speaking, whatever frightens people, frightens them
because it's the ultimate reminder of the cessation of any notion of
control they might have. So if people say "I'm not afraid of dying",
it's because that thought is in their control, and they think that's
what dying is. So they're not afraid of it. They think: "Everybody
dies". True. But why are you afraid of public speaking? Everybody
speaks, yet here you are, terrified of public speaking. Why? Because you
are constantly looking away from the fact that you're not in control.
And when you encounter experiences where you cannot ignore that fact
that you're not in control, it frightens the hell out of you. And that's
what death is---the ultimate cessation of any ground for your notion of
control that you take to be the most fundamental thing. "I am, therefore
things are mine, therefore I'm in control".

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So anattā is basically seeing death.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Yes, seeing death, sure. Seeing death correctly
means not being able to entertain the notion of control, which means not
being my own self, not being my self, not belonging to me, non
appropriation---that's all anattā.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So if I see that for myself...

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** It's going to scare the hell out of you. That's what
happened in the suttas. If today people are not scared when they read
about anattā\* and *nibbāna*, it's because they don't have a clue what
it is, what it really is. So for a *puthujjana*, *nibbāna* is closer to
what death is, the one that he's ignoring. So a *puthujjana*, through
ignoring death, actually ignores the possibility of *nibbāna*. That's
why those people who came to the Buddha, the way the Buddha would lay it
out on them, they couldn't ignore it and would fall on the ground in
complete anxious despair and have a mental breakdown. Saying: "This will
kill me! This will destroy me!". Because they still gratuitously assume
the priority of their sense of "I am", despite the evidence showing the
contrary. They think: "I'm not giving up the notion of 'I am', thus I
will be destroyed." But if you hear the teaching, you realize that could
have not been yours even if you wanted it to, and the only reason you
were regarding it as yours is because you didn't know that it cannot be
yours. And how do you find out that it cannot be yours? Through
practicing mindfulness correctly and seeing that it is inseparable from
the necessary basis of things that cannot be yours.

Dwelling on the characteristics of the necessity of the body, the
independence of the presently enduring feeling, presently enduring
perceptions, yet seeing yourself inseparable from it. That means,
basically, re-molding, re-shaping, going against the grain, and forcing
yourself to see that your own self depends on a basis that cannot be
your self. Because if it were so, the body would not age, would not get
sick and would not die. If it were so, the feelings would not
change---they would always be pleasant, the way you want them to. Yet
the Buddha said: "If that feeling is yours, which one is it? Why do you
experience displeasure if feeling is yours?" You wouldn't do so if you
were in control. So through reminding yourself that you're not in
control---through practicing *maranānussati* correctly---you get to
undermine your sense of self gradually so that you won't freak out and
have a breakdown, although some monks did, that's why the Buddha told
them to do mindfulness of breathing instead. Because if done rightly, it
results in the same principles being discerned.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** So if you were truly unafraid of death, how would you
take other people's deaths?

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Equably. Equally unafraid of it. You would not be
oblivious to what's happening, like some sort of robot who lost the
significance of things. It's still your friend dying, but no amount of
the extent of that experience---perception and feeling in regard to
it---can overturn your mind and make you think that which isn't yours
is, or that which isn't permanent is. The only attitude you could
possibly have is "how could it be otherwise?". How can something that's
been born and grown not die? It's actually insanity to think otherwise.
So grieving over death is on the level of insanity. Because it's
inconceivable for somebody who understood the nature of death to think
"But if only..." It just doesn't apply. How can it be otherwise?

**Ven. Thaniyo:** But you have to get used to this, because I think it'd
be difficult to do it while you're dying...

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Oh, good luck with that. If you've never done it
while you were alive---if you haven't uncovered the nature of death
while you were alive---you're not going to do it when you're dying. It's
too late. So you want to start facing it as soon as you can. That's why,
basically, understanding of death, understanding of the ultimate
non-control, means ultimately giving things up---relinquishing
appropriation and assumption. That's why understanding that fully means
nibbāna. That's why a Sotāpanna, who understood the nature of nibbāna,
or an ariyasāvaka in general, is often spoken about in the suttas as "If
he doesn't attain it during his life, he attains when he's dying". Why?
Because that's where it comes from, the direction of dying and cessation
of control. Now, if he got careless and lazy during his lifetime and
hasn't been making the effort, death will force him in the direction
that he already understood. That's why sometimes ariyasāvaka can become
an arahant at the moment of dying---it's not some mystical light that
appears before you die. It's the direction you understood through your
Right View and everything else, and now you're dragged there, and you
already understood it, so you're dragged where you should have gone
while you were still alive. So it's still good to understand it, but
it's even better to do it now and not wait to be dragged there by death,
even for ariyasāvakas.

**Ven. Thaniyo:** It reminds me of that sutta that says "See as though
blind"---as though you were already blind.

**Ven. Nyanamoli:** Right. Well, see as though you already relinquished
your sight. That's what it means. Doesn't mean to pretend you're blind
and not seeing, because what you're seeing was never a problem―it was
because of you owning your eyes and what comes through, that you were
affected by everything else that's experienced on account of it. So if
you don't forget that the necessary basis for any sight you have is the
physical organs of your eye that you're not in control of, that will
ultimately be diminished and destroyed, you cannot possibly have desire
toward anything you see. The necessary basis for the desire toward
sights is losing the sight of (no pun intended)―losing the perspective
of the nature of the eye that's the necessary basis for any sights. So,
ultimately, you're going to be blind when you die. You will be deaf when
you die. So seeing the ultimate result (death) in regard to your senses
will make you overcome anything that comes through anything that comes
through your senses. But that doesn't mean you're pretending you're not
seeing, which is that wrong view that the man who talked to the Buddha
had, "I'm acting like I'm blind and deaf. I'm ignoring sights and
sounds, I'm pretending I'm not seeing and not hearing", and then the
Buddha said, "Well, you're no better than a blind and a deaf man".
That's something different. That's when people blame the sights and
sounds and any other senses for their suffering, failing to see that
suffering is applicable to them because they appropriated the senses,
not because of what comes through them. So are you still breathing while
we're discussing this particular approach of senses and eyes and
blindness and deafness? Yes. Still the same breath---still the same
basis for your mindfulness enduring for like an hour now. So we've been
doing mindfulness of breathing all this time and discerning the Dhamma
within it. On the terms of the universal principles, not on your own
terms. Or as accurately as you can, whichever way you start. That's why
it says: "He looks at the signs and characteristics". The features of
this thing. He doesn't jump at the answers that his mind provides. Am I
breathing? Yes. What would be the characteristics of this breathing?
Characteristics, not mechanical description, such as thinking: "My lungs
are moving..." or whatever---that's irrelevant. What is the nature of
this act of breathing? Can I stop it when I want to? Well, only
relatively so. Can I make sure it never goes away? No, not really. Do I
have a say in that which is necessary for the act of breathing, the
breathing apparatus? Not in the slightest. If an accident were to happen
or a bacteria or virus were to attack these organs, would I still be
able to breathe as freely? No. So I'm taking for granted that it will be
forever, that it'll be in my control, that it'll be unobstructed. Why am
I taking that for granted? Because I'm not thinking sufficiently enough
that I cannot take it for granted. That's it. What is the condition for
ignorance? It's ignoring, basically. You stop ignoring, you stop
conditioning your ignorance. Stop ignoring certain universal truths,
that's it.
