---
title: Determining Determinations
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
layout: post
---

by Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero

[[source]](https://www.hillsidehermitage.org/determining-determinations/)

***

1\. Feeling, perception and consciousness are always there
together.[\[1\]](#n1){:#ref1} It is impossible to have
them arising independently and on their own; when there is one, the
other two are present as well. They do not pass into each other's
domain[\[2\]](#n2){:#ref2}: one feels one's feeling, one
perceives one's perception, one cognizes one's cognizance. Assuming that
it is the same thing that one feels, perceives and cognizes, or assuming
that it is a different thing that one feels, perceives, and cognizes, or
both-the-same-&-different thing that one feels, perceives, and cognizes,
or neither-the-same-nor-different thing that one feels, perceives, and
cognizes, means that *assumed thing* is *there-*it *exists*. One
*conceives it* through one's feeling, one's perception, and one's
cognizance. One conceives that thing because of which feeling,
perception and cognizance are there, *as that thing* because of which
feeling, perception and cognizance are there. But since all one can ever
feel is one's feeling; all one can ever perceive is one's perception;
all one can ever cognize is one's cognizance-*that thing* which is
conceived *as that* *because of* which feeling, perception and
cognizance are there, will *have to* *be* either *a feeling, a
perception* or *a cognizance*, and as such *cannot be that because of
which* feeling, perception and cognizance are there.[\[3\]](#n3){:#ref3} By conceiving a feeling, or a perception, or a cognizance
*as that because of which* feeling, perception and cognizance are there,
one *assumes* that feeling, or perception, or cognizance, *existing*
*independently* of feeling, perception and cognizance, *as that because
of which* feeling, perception and cognizance are there. Thus, *that
because of which* feeling, perception and cognizance *are* there,
*manifests* *in that* feeling, perception or cognizance which are
*assumed [to be]{.underline} that because of which* feeling, perception
and cognizance are there. Thus, *that because of which* feeling,
perception and cognizance *are* there*,* manifests in that being-it
*exists*.

2\. That because of which feeling, perception and cognizance are there,
is that which is *a* *necessary condition* for feeling, perception and
cognizance that are there, because *without it*, that feeling,
perception and cognizance would *not be there*. As a necessary
condition, that because of which feeling, perception and cognizance are
there, is thus *that by which* feeling, perception and cognizance are
*determined.* But since through the assumption, *that by which* feeling,
perception and cognizance are *determined*, *manifests* *as* feeling,
perception, or cognizance *because of which* that feeling, perception
and cognizance are there, *that* feeling, perception and cognizance *are
determined [as that by which]{.underline}* feeling, perception and
cognizance *are determined*.[\[4\]](#n4){:#ref4} Thus,
through *not knowing* that one can only feel one's feelings, perceive
one's perception, cognize one's cognizance,[\[5\]](#n5){:#ref5} one *determines that by which* one's feeling, perception
and cognizance are *determined, as* a feeling, a perception or a
cognizance. Through that lack of knowledge, determinations are
manifested-*avijjāpaccayā saṅkārā.*

3\. One determines one's determinations through assuming that because of
which determinations are there.

But that because of which determinations are there cannot be that which
is determined by those determinations, since all one can determine are
one's determination, not *that* *because of which* those determinations
are there. Since determinations cannot determine that because of which
determinations are there, that because of which determinations are there
is that which is non-determinable-it is *undetermined*. If that because
of which the determinations are there was *to be* determined, then the
escape from determinations would not be possible.[\[6\]](#n6){:#ref6}

One can know that that because of which determinations are there cannot
be determined.

Without knowing *that knowing,* one's knowledge of that because of which
determinations are there, *determines* that because of which
determinations are there, *as that* because of which determinations are
there.[\[7\]](#n7){:#ref7}

Since that because of which determinations are there *cannot
fundamentally be determined,* one's knowledge that *determines* that
because of which determinations are there, *leads to* 'assuming' *that*
because of which determinations are there *as that* because of which
determinations are there.

And since that assumption is then *there*, *that* which is determined as
*that* *because* *of which* determinations are there, is *there too*,
*as that assumed* *determination* because of which determinations are
there-it is *manifested*, it *exists*.

**One can know that that because of which determinations are there
cannot be determined.**

**By knowing *that knowing*,**[\[8\]](#n8){:#ref8} **one's knowledge of that because of which determinations are there, *does not determine* that because of which determinations are there,**[\[9\]](#n9){:#ref9} ***as that* because of which determinations are there.**

**Since that because of which determinations are there *cannot
fundamentally be determined,***[\[10\]](#n10){:#ref10}
**one's knowledge that *does not determine* that because of which
determinations are there *does not lead to* 'assuming' *that* because of
which determinations are there *as that* because of which determinations
are there.**

**And since that assumption is then *not there,* that which is
determined as that because of which determinations are there, is *not
there either*, *as that assumed* *determination* because of which
determinations are there-it is *not manifested,* it *does not
exist.***[\[11\]](#n11){:#ref11} [\[12\]](#n12){:#ref12} [\[13\]](#n13){:#ref13}

1. {:#n1} Cf. MN 43. [\[back\]](#ref1)

2. {:#n2} Cf. Notes on DN 15. [\[back\]](#ref2)

3. {:#n3} Now is probably the time to mention that none of this, nor paragraphs to follow, can be grasped intellectually by the reader. Things that are described here are not to be made sense of in a rationally or philosophically satisfying way, but to be seen in a certain order that they arise in one's experience. Hence the deliberate repetitive style which aligns things in the order they are to be understood (which is also the reason why the Suttas are in that form). Also, refraining from a too particular and established terminology was intentional, since that would most likely lead a reader to assume that he already knows what those terms refer to. [\[back\]](#ref3)

4. {:#n4} Cf. Khanda Saṃyutta viii,7. [\[back\]](#ref4)

5. {:#n5} And not that because of which feeling, perception and cognizance are there. [\[back\]](#ref5)

6. {:#n6} "There is, monks, (a) non-born, non-become, non-made, non determined. If, monks, there were not that non-born, non-become, non-made, non-determined, an escape from (the) born, become, made, determined would not be discernible. But, because there is (a) non-born, non-become, non-made, non-determined escape from (the) born, become, made, determined is discernible."---Nibbāna Sutta, Ud. 8/3. the structure of the experience fundamentally be appropriated, freedom from the appropriation is possible. [\[back\]](#ref6)

7. {:#n7} "From nibbāna, he has a percept of nibbāna; having known nibbāna from nibbāna, he conceives nibbāna, he conceives in nibbāna, he conceives out of nibbāna, he conceives 'My' nibbāna, he delights nibbāna. Why is that? He has not fully understood it, I say."---MN 1. Also cf. MN 102, \[237\]. [\[back\]](#ref7)

8. {:#n8} One knows that whether one intends toward, away, both or neither, in regard to that because of which intentions are there, that because of which intentions are there remains there, regardless of the intention in regard to it. By understanding that it is fundamentally inaccessible to one's intentions, one ceases to crave towards it with those intentions, one ceases to assume it through those intentions, since neither intentions nor that which directly stands upon them, namely-one's assumption-could access it. And one knows that. \['Ignorant intentions' are simply craving, which leads to 'assumption'-taṇhapaccayā upādāna. Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op.cit., p.56, footnote f.: "Intention does not imply craving-a hard thing to understand!"\]). [\[back\]](#ref8)

9. {:#n9} Does not "stand for it" in one's experience, does not "represent it", does not "manifest it". [\[back\]](#ref9)

10. {:#n10} Cannot be 'accessed' by it. [\[back\]](#ref10)

11. {:#n11} The assumption is made redundant. [\[back\]](#ref11)

12. {:#n12} If one thinks "there is that because of which intentions are there, which is inaccessible to those intentions", that thought 'stands for' that because of which intentions are there, and through that thought one assumes access to that inaccessible-inaccessible exists. If one knows that regardless of what a thought or intention stand for, it can never "step outside" of its nature-one can only think one's thoughts (perception perceived) or intend one's intentions, not that because of which that thought/intention are there-one ceases to assume that which that intention stands for, because of which intention is there. Thus, intention remains, while "attempts to access" fade away, since one sees them as pointless and loses interest in them. When those "attempts" are thoroughly subdued, 'the assumption' of that which was assumed "accessible" (through those very attempts) disappears too, never to return. [\[back\]](#ref12)

13. {:#n13} The only reason why assumption can be made redundant, is because it was redundant in the first place. Not knowing that it was redundant, makes it necessary, until it ceases to be so. And the reason why assumption presents itself as necessary is because it assumes that which is necessary in one's experience, namely-the five aggregates. Thus, the five aggregates, which are necessary in one's experience, come to exist, through the assuming of them as that which is necessary in one's experience. But since they are necessary in one's experience, assuming them as necessary in one's experience is not necessary. But until one knows that, that assumption will exist. [\[back\]](#ref13)


