## Papañca-Saññā-Sankhā

This compound has represented, to paraphrase John D. Ireland from his
Udāna translation notes, a stumbling block which even the ancient
commentaries find difficult to define. If the importance of the term is
to be deduced from the extent of its difficulty then indeed
understanding of this compound carries a lot of significance in regard
to grasping of the Buddha's Teaching.

There are various translations of *papañca-saññā-sankhā*, with currently
the most prominent ones being either Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi's "notions
\[born of\] mental proliferations" translating the term *papañca* as
'proliferation'; or Ven. Ñāṇamoli Thera's "calculations of perceptions
of diversifications" where he renders papañca as 'diversification'.
Beyond these two, plus the PTS Dictionary definition, I am not familiar
in detail with any other different interpretations of this compound. I
am aware that Ven. Ñāṇananda in his "Concept and Reality in Early
Buddhist Thought" addresses this topic to a certain degree and also that
Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi based his views of the term upon this
interpretation^[Which, as I will attempt to show in this essay, is
over-simplified.] but I, myself, have never actually read Ven.
Ñāṇananda's book so my view on this matter will come from perhaps, to
some extent, a different angle.

To start with, the respective terms 'diversification' and
'proliferation' do not deviate from the meaning of *papañca*. According
to the PTS dictionary, *papañca* is "expansion, diffuseness,
manifoldedness" or "obstacle, hindrance or delay". The other members of
the compound are defined as *saññā* (perception) and *sankhā* (sign or
characteristic). So the above-mentioned translations would, to some
degree, convey the nature of *papañca-saññā-sankhā* quite accurately
and, as Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi says in *The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha^[Translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi, Wisdom Publications, Third edition 2005.]* (endnote no. 229, p. 1204-5), "no rendering \[of this compound\] is utterly beyond doubt". The question which raises itself then is not how to etymologically trace the exact roots and origination of the compound, since such, a task in this case proves impossible in the absolute sense (and many seem to agree with this). Rather, it is better to focus and try to find out *within* one's own experience and practice what is implied existentially and
phenomenologically in the Suttas by this term.

At the risk of being incomprehensible on some points, I would try to use
'descriptive' language, rather than overly technical terms as people's
general views are already quite firm in regard to such terminology and
it is very likely that they will be coming from a quite different place
than me, probably *too* different which could obstruct them from
understanding what I'm trying to say. In order to reduce this
possibility to a minimum I thought of using some more common terms in my
descriptions which carry less chance of being misunderstood. I hope I
won't miss the mark too much.

Those familiar with phenomenology and the philosophy of existence should
not have any problems in understanding a statement like all our
experience is intentional or teleological or simply---significant. Each
thing (*dhamma*) which is being experienced in our everyday life has, as
its *inherent nature*, to point to other thing(s), within the experience
as a whole. The thing's significance is not something 'steady' or
'inchangeable', although it often might appear so. The significance of a
thing is, rather, something which is being *acquired* through the
*repetition* of the respective experiences of that very thing. During
this, the whole perception of a thing comes to 'grow' in a course of
time, so to speak, and though there are certainly significances which
are *recognized* as common to all people, at a more fundamental level
they are all *individually* acquired and carried by each of
us^[Preferences and values being perhaps too coarse yet a good enough example of this.].

Without going into greater details let us say that in the Suttas this
intentionality of experience is what is meant by the statement "with the
grain" or *anuloma*. Actually, it is probably better to be more precise
and to re-qualify this and say: taking for granted this intentionality,
holding it and appropriating it, makes this *with* of "with the grain"
to appear. In the *arahant*'s case, the ignorance is completely
destroyed, yet the grain still remains, i.e. things *do not* stop
pointing to other things, but this 'with' ceases to exist and is being
replaced by 'against' as a result of which we get "against the
grain"---*patiloma*. What has changed is the fundamental *direction* of
regarding this very *directionality of experience.* Thus, even in the
case of complete liberation things continue to be teleological or 'with
purpose' so they still point to other things and so on. All this is
being mentioned for the reason that the term *papañca* is probably too
often misunderstood to simply mean 'mental proliferation', 'when one
thinks or analyzes too much' or something like that. Although these
things do imply *papañca* (or to be more precise ignorance and
desire-and-lust), the above said nevertheless shows us that if *papañca*
is anything, it is certainly more fundamental than that. In support of
this we may add that *papañca* is frequently linked with *maññanā*,
'conceving' (for which see Mūlapariyāya Sutta, MN 1) which certainly
represents the most fundamental 'occurrence' in a mind affected with
ignorance. Thus, what *papañca* would imply is nothing less than this
very *intentionality* of our experience and its *tendency* to grow and
expand. However this can happen only when that 'with' is present i.e.
when the mind is not free from the bonds of ignorance and when it keeps
following things in their appearance--- "...his consciousness flows
after the sign of form \[sound, smell, tastes, touches, thoughts\], is
tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of form, if fettered by
the fetter of
gratification..."^[Uddhesavibhanga
Sutta, MN 138. \[iii,225\]]. And surely enough it is said that the *arahant*
is *nippapañca*---without diversifications, free from any attachments
(*upadhi*), free from burden *accumulated* in the past.

Thus, one's world (everything which appears---*nāma-rūpa*), expands.
One's views, desires etc. expand too, yet this should not be understood
in a momentary sense, which would suggest that they will somehow
'shrink'
afterwards^[They
would only do so in the arahant's
case.] by
themselves. Their *intensity* or the *intensity of their presence*, once
'accumulated' i.e. came to being, is being 'assumed' or 'held'
(*upādāna*) at that (new) face value. When this happens---and it happens
through the repetition of \[ignorant\] actions as said
above---consciousness "becomes established" upon that *degree of
presence*, which then becomes the *actual experience* of that *thing*.
Thus, the intensity of experience, that which appears as *nāma-rūpa*
grows (for more details see Mahānidāna Sutta, DN 15 \[ii,63\]). This
kind of pattern stretches from the most fundamental levels of our
existence (as seen in Mūlapariyāya Sutta), up to the coarsest ones which
we might say are, "resorting to rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls,
disputes, recrimination, malicious words and false
speech^[Madhupiṇḍika
Sutta, MN 18; translation taken from The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha, Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi, Wisdom Publications, Third
edition 2005, p. 202 \[i,109\].]...", that is *the directly painful actions
resulting from one's ignorance*. Thus, based on the above, *papañca*
represents the 'diffusion' of this fundamental underlying principle with
ignorance being *necessarily present*, and consequently
*papañca-saññā-sankhā* are all 'calculations' or 'notions', perceived
and originated as a result of taking this principle of diffusion for
granted i.e. not understanding it.

To conclude, it is worth mentioning that this whole situation would be
much clearer if we can bear in mind Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera's description of
the infinite hierarchy of consciousness, the different levels of
generality of *nāma-rūpa*---*viññāṇa*. That is because
*papañca-saññā-sankhā* is not something which appears on a voluntary
level, as if one could stop it at any time; it stretches from the most
general (reflexive) levels of
existence^[Compare
also the nature of the five hindrances. It takes the first jhāna for one
to be able to suppress them, which speaks for itself, since such
strength of one's concentration is enough for becoming an arahant (if
there is wisdom, of course).]. What one is responsible for, in that whole
structure, is "delighting in, welcoming and holding to..." the "source
through which perceptions and notions \[born of\] mental proliferation
beset a
man..."^[op.
cit. p. 202.]. Thus the hierarchy of signifying things continues
to arise (cease and change-while-standing) but it no longer grows; it is
"cut off at the root, made like a palm stump". Its root was ignorance in
itself and with its absence everything founded upon it comes to an
end---one is free. In other words the respective experiences of the
*puthujjana* and *arahant* alike, share the same fundamental nature of
impermanence (arising and ceasing) but the respective *intensities* of
those experiences are changed; for the *arahant feeling none* of
it)^[Compare
Ven. Sāriputta's answer to Ven. Udāyi when the later asked him what is
there that is pleasant when there is nothing felt \[in nibbāna\]---"Just
this is pleasant, friend, that herein there is nothing felt", AN
iv,414.]
and for the *puthujjana* dependant on the amount of ignorance being
present. More ignorance, more 'intensity', things appear as more
'pressing' and one is easily prone to giving in to desire-and-lust. The
arising of things in the *puthujjana*'s mind brings diffusion of
perceptions and notions which, while not understood at its roots, will
in return diffuse further and further and so on. This cannot happen in
the *arahant*'s mind any more. His consciousness has 'ceased' so there
is nothing to follow and diversify upon this teleological characteristic
of the existential structure, which will remain only until his
aggregates 'break apart'.
