---
layout: page
---


## Peripheral Awareness

by Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero

Mindfulness done correctly is when the mind is _anchored_ in something. That something must be a thing that is not directly attended to, but instead, has to be a _reference point_ to the attended thing (hence we call it “anchor”). If a thing is not directly attended to but there, we call that thing to be a “background”. It’s a background to a thing we attend (which makes that thing a “foreground”). This is the basic principle of mindfulness, on which we can expand here below.

One begins developing this practice of awareness by being mindful of the experience as a _whole_. For example, one is mindful of ‘being-seated-on-a-chair-reading-a-Dhamma-essay’. That is one’s _situation_ at that very time. That is one’s experience as a “whole”. This is always the necessary starting point. What is very important is to prevent the tendency to become absorbed in one particular thing. (Feeling, sensations or perception, and similar). Instead, one has to broaden the mindfulness and become aware of the _generality_ of one’s current situation, without losing the sight of the particular either.[^1]

Of course, the attempts of discerning the background of one’s current experience will not be perfect in the beginning. One will more often than not fall into a mistake of over-attending one’s experience as a whole. This is a mistake of making that background into an _object_ of one’s attention, defining it, clarifying it, trying to keep it in front. These are all ways of making it a _foreground_, which means that then something else will be in place of the background.

The natural tendency is to ask “_What_ is then the background?”. This is however a wrong question. And it’s wrong because we are not concerned with the _content_ of the background (or foreground for that matter), which would be the answer to “what?”. Instead our concern should be with _nature_ of it. So one needs to restrain the tendency to clarify _what_ is that “background”, and learn how to start discerning the domain of it. The domain of the “_periphery_”, its nature, in regard to what is presently _enduring_ here.

Thus, something one attends to directly is what a foreground is at the time. It can be anything that is the current object of one’s attention. That thing has manifested, and it is enduring as such. That’s the basic structural property of one’s experience, there is no problem with this. However, if one wants to develop mindfulness, a step further is necessary. That step is developing the peripheral “vision” in regard to that very same foreground object, but _without_ making that peripheral vision the new object by _directly_ attending to it. The Buddha referred to this as “_yoniso manasikara_”, which is often translated as “proper attention”. _Yoniso manasikara_ is the correct way of attending to the peripheral. _Manasikara_ means “attention”. _Yoni_ means “womb”. So when a thing is present in the front, in the foreground, its peripheral background is that very “womb” the thing has “came from”, so to speak. _Yoniso manasikara_ is womb-attention, or less literally: a peripheral attention.[^2]

Thus, the point is to learn _how_ to attend. Not so much “what”. It’s about discerning the habit of “over-attending” and learning how to not resort to it. This habit manifests through either indulging or resisting the object of one’s attention. Either way, one is fully concerned with it.  This is why one must stop trying to “observe” one’s experience as an object of one’s attention and instead, acknowledge it and let it _endure_ on its own. (Let it persist or change-while-remaining-the-same-thing). Once the arisen experience of one’s attention is allowed to be, then gradually and indirectly, discerning of the peripheral _domain_ can manifest.

The most practical way of practising this is through mindfulness of body postures. That’s why these things are often called “foundations” of mindfulness, or “anchors” or “reference points”. It’s because they are _always_ rooted in the _background_. (E.g. foundations are _under_; an anchor is at the _bottom_; the  reference point is at the _distance_.  Under, bottom, away… it means ‘not-here-directly-in-front-of-me’). So for example: while I’m seated, I’m reading an article, actively scrolling through the pages, paying attention to what’s being said in it. Things I’m “doing”, like reading, writing, talking, etc. are things I’m attending to (foreground). And I’m attending to them all _while_ I’m _seated_. That’s the reference point that is enough for proper mindfulness. That is what’s the background here. Yet, if I switch my attention and start attending to the fact that I’m sitting on the chair, then the body posture of “sitting” ceases to be the background in my experience. Why? Because I’ve broken the relationship of “referencing”. There is no more “_while_”, since I forgot about the reading, and became concerned with sitting. When this happens, one can either go back to the original foreground, or discern the newly present background in regard to the attended experience of sitting. The new background will have to be something even more _general_ than “sitting posture”. And the more general thing in that case is nothing other than awareness of the “body there”.[^3]

Body postures are more general than attending to a particular action or perception. But having a “body _there_” is even more general than the postures. Because to be walking, sitting, standing or lying down, one needs to have a _body_ in the first place. That’s why one can also use the knowledge of “there is body”, as the peripheral anchor for one’s daily actions and experiences. The presence of one’s living body is a fundamental requirement for _any_ action. We can go even higher (even more general), as we mentioned earlier, and develop awareness of the phenomenon of Earth, Water, Fire or Air. Or even further, in the practice of more refined _kasinas_, as described in the _Suttas_. The point is that the principle remains the same.

We need to stress that this is something that requires _development_. It’s not something that can be just “figured out”, or read once and made sense of. It requires a diligent _repetition_ of “stepping back” when over-attending one’s experience as a whole. And then “stepping in” when ignoring it (under-attending it, forgetting about the background). So, it takes time and effort in order for it to be correctly _discerned_ and _recognized_.

The problem with common practice of meditation is that people are encouraged to get “absorbed” into the particular “meditation object”. The practice becomes a form of focusing on the foreground at the expense of everything else. And not just that, people end up focusing on the objects twice as hard. This is because their view of meditation is to look and _perceive_ the “momentary” foreground (the whole idea of “observing ‘_sensations_'”). Then within that they try to perceive even more _particular_ things. So it’s not just the _domain_ of the foreground, but the content proliferates further too. In cases like this, the ‘background’, as a foundation of mindfulness that needs to be understood, is even further obscured.

The ‘reference point’ means being aware of something, without having to actively think about it. That’s the basic principle of mindfulness. This should _always_ be the basis for _samadhi_ (according to the _Suttas_).[^4] That is why, if mindfulness and awareness is practised correctly, it  will result in _knowledge_ of the nature of things. The very definition of knowledge is knowing something without having to actively think about it. The knowledge reappears when it is attended to. One knows what one knows. This is the important point because this type of mindfulness of the background that’s simultaneous with the presently arisen phenomenon[^5], results in the establishment of mind (_samadhi_) that transcends _sensuality_ and _ill will_. The whole domain (scope) of unwholesome.[^6] And that’s why that _samadhi_ further results in complete knowledge of liberation.

The catch is in persistent effort of repetition of _learning_ how to _attend_ to things _peripherally_, without having to “directly” look at them. For a mind affected with _avijja_, the “direct look”, the “_ayoniso manasikara_” always involves _appropriation_ and the _Self-view_. And “learning to attend” things peripherally can be done on many different “bases” or “domains” that are structurally present as the background of our attended experience. These domains are the domain of feelings, thoughts, and even one’s intentions (bodily, verbal and mental).

For example, being aware of the _general feeling_ present, without trying to _perceive_ it as “sensation” (i.e. “in” the body), is another way of establishing the proper mindfulness.

Or, something we often talk about, taking up of personal _responsibility_. If one takes it up, then no matter what the engagement with the particular task is, the background of it (the “womb” of that engagement) is one’s own _choice_ to engage with it in the first place. Taking up responsibility, means becoming aware of the “background” choices one makes throughout one’s life.[^7]

Furthermore, taking up responsibility for what one has chosen, a person gets to maintain that mindfulness through the very particular actions one is doing on account of it. And that mindfulness of responsibility is not something they would have to perpetually think about. No, that mindfulness is being _felt_ instead. (That’s why the initial awareness of _any_ form of responsibility is always _unpleasant_ and concerning).

The choice behind one’s actions is a general _unity_, a _context_ of one’s acts, that is present in each of those acts individually. Present as a peripheral background. It is because of this that _sila_ or _virtue_ is a necessary prerequisite for understanding. When one’s actions are based on _distortions_ of priority (particular sensuality _over_ general nature of choice regarding it, for example), one cannot see a clear responsible background while engaged in such pursuits. No perspective, so to speak. So, first actions that maintain absorptions with particularity must be divorced from the unwholesome domain. Then they must be further restrained, by avoiding the distracting of oneself. By undoing wrong way of attending to things. By not cultivating improper attention. Only then can one begin to discern the _signs_ of the peripheral, characteristics of the background hereby discussed. Only then one will be able to “grasp the sign of one’s mind” or _cittanimitta_. A necessary requirement for the arising of the Right view.

[^1]: This is why the correct practice of mindfulness results in higher establishments of mind (_samadhi_). For example, this is where mind surmounts the fundamental “generality” of form, by the way of surmounting the generality of earth, water, fire and air. Also, there is a reason that the order of elements always stays the same. They are have a particular structural order of their generality. And one can discern them in that order only.

[^2]: That’s also why this type of attention is said by the Buddha to be one of the necessary pre-requisites for the arising of the Right view.

[^3]: >“…or mindfulness that “there is body” is simply established in him to the extent necessary for the final knowledge.” 

	>– MN 10, _Satipatthana Sutta_

[^4]: >“Unification of mind, friend Visakha, is samadhi. The four foundations of mindfulness are the basis of samadhi. The four right kind of striving are the equipment of samadhi. The repetition, the development and cultivation of those same states is what development of samadhi is.” 

	>– MN 44, _Culavedalla Sutta_

[^5]: Experience as a whole, the ‘foreground-without-focusing-on-particular-object-witin-it’.

[^6]: Sensuality is _always_ concerned with the particular content of the experience. Particular _sight_, _sound_, _smell_, _taste_, _touch_. Thus, mindfulness of the peripheral domain to the particular foreground, can result in overcoming it.

[^7]: Hence the fully developed knowledge that came from the Right View, results in freeing an individual from his actions (_kamma_). Full understanding of the nature of the “choice” as “peripheral”, removes the gratuitous _assumption_ (_upadana_) of necessity of the “Chooser” i.e. the Self. Understanding the choice or intentional intention (_cetana_) frees oneself from choosing (i.e. acting).


