---
title: Intentions Behind Ones Actions
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
date: 2018-05-21
category: Essays
layout: post
---

by Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero

The Right meditation is inseparable from the Right view. That means that
even if a person doesn’t have the Right view, their meditation should be
concerned about getting it. To put it simply—it comes down to developing
the self-transparency (or self-honesty) concerning skilful as skilful
(<span lang="pi">*kusala*</span>) and unskilful as unskilful
(<span lang="pi">*akusala*</span>). The Buddha defined the Right view in
those very terms—knowing “good as good”, and “bad as bad”. The person
with the Right view knows for oneself, beyond any doubt,
<span lang="pi">*kusala*</span> as <span lang="pi">*kusala*</span> and
<span lang="pi">*akusala*</span> as <span lang="pi">*akusala*</span>. By
seeing it—he recognizes it. He doesn’t need to hold or adopt any other
external criteria. The clarity of his vision pertains to here and now,
internally. Thus, for someone who hasn’t achieved that yet, that’s where
the meditation should start. Obtaining of the Right criteria and then
meditating through it. Keeping it “composed” is the definition of the
Right <span lang="pi">*samadhi*</span>.

The problem is that this kind of instruction is very non-specific.
People today usually need something more proliferated and palpable. They
require meditation “methods”. An average man today wants a “recipe”, a
prescription of “steps”. He needs to know what *exactly* he should *do*,
that would then automatically result in his liberation. Unfortunately,
it doesn’t work like that. If we look at the Suttas, whenever the Buddha
was talking about meditation it was to bring the fulfilment of knowledge
and wisdom. Yet, if a person has none of the latter to begin with, then
the fulfilment cannot arise nor be fabricated mechanically. Very often
the Buddha’s reply on how to meditate would be in instructing people in
recognizing and avoiding the unskilful, and cultivating
(<span lang="pi">*bhavana*</span>) of the skilful. Discerning the nature
of <span lang="pi">*kusala*</span> and <span lang="pi">*akusala*</span>
has the potential of taking the mind above both. Freeing it from action
(<span lang="pi">*kamma*</span>) and it’s results
(<span lang="pi">*vipaka*</span>), since they are bound to the domain of
skilful and unskilful. And that’s exactly why performing (*doing* or
*acting*) of the specific steps, cannot take one beyond the nature of
<span lang="pi">*kamma*</span>. Understanding it however, might.

Furthermore, methods and techniques usually don’t amount to more than
management of the problem of suffering. Management of something cannot
actually uproot that very thing. So, instead of that, a person will be
better of in trying to discern what kind of attitude towards meditation
can be sustained throughout the day. An attitude that wouldn’t need any
particular favorable environment or special conditions to be applied in.
Regardless of whether one is sitting in a full lotus posture, or just
walking down the street. One needs to find that kind of *composure* that
one can maintain in both circumstances. The way to do this is if the
composure is established upon the *general mindfulness*. Not the
particular observation and adherence to the prescribed steps of a
“meditation” technique, that results in one being *absorbed* in it.
Absorption is the opposite of general mindfulness.

Every <span lang="pi">*jhana*</span> for example is fully founded upon
the basis of the unshakeable mindfulness as number of Suttas often
mention. So, even if a person wants to do his meditation in a “formal”
manner, such as sit for an hour few times a day, that is fine. As long
as it is not done for the purpose of developing some sort of “experience
of absoption” out of it. Like trying to watch one’s breath hoping for
some novelty energy release. The point of meditation is to remain
*present* as much as possible. Present or mindful of *whatever* is
**already there** (feelings, perceptions, intentions). Not interfere
with it, or deny it, or try to replace it. Just discerning the enduring
presence of the arisen experience. Emotionally, perceptually and
intentionally. That kind of composure can then be “spread out” over
one’s entire day, even when a person is not sitting down to meditate.

And this should not be too hard to grasp (though that doesn’t mean it
will be easy to accept). The whole point of the practice of Dhamma and
meditation is nothing other than understanding of the nature of things.
The understanding that arises on account of mindful discerning of
whatever is *arisen* and *enduring* in our experience. And it’s that
understanding of the unskilful that frees the mind from it. If a person
wants to be truly free once and for all, the only way to do so is
through the knowledge and mindfulness.

Thus, if one wants to practice in a manner that pertains to this final
goal of freedom, he needs to become very mindful and honest about
intentionality behind any actions. Simple actions, more complex ones,
careless or important, big or small—actions of any kind done by body,
speech or mind. One will need to attend to them mindfully until the
motivation and intentions behind is fully seen. That is because it is
the intention that defines wholesome action as wholesome and unwholesome
as unwholesome. The “reason” for one’s action so to speak. That’s where
skilfulness of an action is rooted at. That’s also the *real* “reason”,
the one deep inside that one might not be willing to admit to oneself.
If a person is able to reach the full transparency of one’s intentional
actions and its roots, that person is a step closer in discerning what
makes <span lang="pi">*kusala*</span> as <span lang="pi">*kusala*</span>
and <span lang="pi">*akusala*</span> as
<span lang="pi">*akusala*</span>. That person is a step closer to the
beginning of the Right criteria or view.

So, if one needs to meditate, one needs to be concerned with one’s
actions and choices. (Which is also why <span lang="pi">*sila*</span> or
virtue comes before the Dhamma). In such manner any motivation for one’s
intentions behind doing this or that will reveal and not taken at its
face value. Through this persistent self-questioning one can also see
whether an action that is about to be, is rooted in an unskilful motive.
Like sensuality, ill will, vanity or distraction for example.
Furthermore, one would need to abandon only *that*. The unwholesome. One
doesn’t need to cancel the entire arisen experience and behaviour. That
would be a form of overdoing it, and not using mindfulness as a criteria
of discernment. “Is what I am about to do rooted in greed? Lust? How
about ill-will and annoyance or anger?” Or “am I acting out of a desire
for distraction and forgetfulness? Am I willingly giving in to acts and
desires that would delude me further and mask the unskilful basis of
those very actions?” Such questioning about the personal and inner
dimension of one’s daily experiences and actions will *have to* result
in being mindful. This is a definition of (proper) vipassana or
investigation, since that’s exactly what’s being done. Self
investigating the motivation behind any actions. And it is obvious to
see how this kind of attitude and mindful practice would result in
discerning “good as good, bad as bad”. How it would not be dependent on
any external authority or belief. Instead be a direct, visible,
universal criteria seen personally for oneself.

It’s important to note it is not necessary that one becomes neurotic or
obsessed (though it might happen) about it. Always having to *actually*
ask oneself “what am I doing?” before every action. What’s important is
the *attitude* of such *questioning*. The “answer” is already implied
within it. One already *knows* why one is acting. Whether one is aware
of it or not, that’s a different matter. Of course, until that attitude
is developed and refined, a person will have to endure possible loss of
(superficial) confidence and choice paralysis. That’s because the
implications of one’s smallest actions are becoming more revealed. A
person starts to feel responsible even for things that are not in his
control.

So through this kind of “revealing” of the roots of one’s actions, one
is simultaneously becoming less and less able to ignore one’s true
intentions. One will not be able to turn a blind eye towards acting good
while the real motivation underneath it isn’t necessarily so. That’s why
this attitude is “self-transparent”. Whatever is on the surface, one
simultaneously sees beneath it *as well*.

Consequently, one will be able to also see if something is genuinely not
rooted in greed, aversion or delusion. In such case even if the whole
world comes to tell him that that’s still “bad”, his discernment would
remain unshaken. As mentioned above, that’s because good and bad are
defined by the intention behind them. Not by the common tradition, views
and opinions, duty and culture, but by whether greed, aversion and
delusion underlies them.

It should be clear by now that the self-honesty or transparency is not
an optional thing (or just one of different ways leading to the same
goal). It’s an absolute pre-requisite for any chance of getting the
Right view and knowing how to practice the Dhamma. If a person still has
difficulties in abandoning own dependence upon a particular “method” of
practice, they can still take up this practice of self-questioning all
the time, as a “method”. Although not ideal, it will still result in
seeing through the motivation and emotional need for any methods in the
first place. (Needing “something to do”.) By seeing the subtle
motivation under *any* action, one will automatically feel responsible
for one’s choices. No matter how “justified” those might seem
externally. The weight on it is always on oneself, and that’s something
that one cannot ignore any further.

It is also then when the full weight of the Buddha’s “beings are owners
of one’s actions” saying, is truly felt.
