---
alt_doc_url: "https://pathpress.org/contemplation-and-awareness/"
archive_url: "https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20181216%20-%2041hh%20-%20GUIDED%20CONTEMPLATION%20-%20Awareness.mp3"
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
category: Transcriptions
date: 2018-12-16
description: a summarized transcription
doc_url: "https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/162"
episode: 41
layout: post
title: Contemplation and Awareness
youtube_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AQQUBOLx2g4"
---

a summarized transcription

by **Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero**

[\[video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AQQUBOLx2g4) [\[audio\]](https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20181216%20-%2041hh%20-%20GUIDED%20CONTEMPLATION%20-%20Awareness.mp3)

<u>**Discerning the background**</u>

**Thaniyo:** In terms of contemplating the 32 parts of the body, how do
you do that correctly? You actually cannot see your brain, your lungs,
intestines, etc. And when you think about it, when you want to
contemplate your brain, your lungs, etc, then what is there is actually
an idea, a thought. So actually now I’m attending to that thought, and
then I’m picking up the signs of those things.

**Nyanamoli:** Yes, that’s the difference there. The only way people
approach this, the only way they would know how, is through attending—in
other words, they would be attending that thought as if that’s really
attending to your brain, which you can’t. So, the only way to see these
body parts correctly, in the relevant contemplation manner, is
indirectly, without attending to them directly as objects of your
attention. You are to discern them as that-because-of-which you are here
living, attending to things.

That’s the difference between doing body contemplation rightly and
wrongly. Wrongly is basically just repeating these parts, visualizing
them and thinking that that somehow equates to understanding them. It
might provide you an initial kind of reduction of sensual craving,
because you never think about those things, but very soon you’ll get
used to it and it’ll become meaningless because you can’t see those
things directly. That’s why in paṭiccasamuppāda the saḷāyatana (the
six-sense base) is the ultimate indirect, it’s the ultimate peripheral.
It’s the ultimate that-because-of-which-there-is-the-world-for-you, that
because of which you are the perceiver, you are the conceiver of it.
That’s why when the Buddha describes the six-sense base, it’s described
in that almost external, medical manner—the fleshy eye, the nose and so
on—because that’s the closest you can see it. You can’t see it directly:
you cannot attend to your eye, you can only attend to the object.

But that’s not the eye because of which you see things. You are
misconceiving it, thinking that that’s the eye because of which you see
things. You start assuming that you can attend that because of which
your attention is there. You have to stop trying to attend to the eye,
the nose, and start discerning it as a basis, as a physical basis for
the world to exist for you. In the same sense, you can be attending to a
cup, attending to a table, attending to the image of your brain, but
you’re just regarding these things as overly objectified objects of your
attention. In a way, they have something in common—they’re all material.
But you don’t want to regard your brain just as you regard a cup,
because a cup is insignificant to you—you want to discern that that
objective brain that you’re thinking about is the reason for your
subjectivity, because of which you’re able to attend to the idea of the
brain in the first place.

**Thaniyo:** So, I have to keep reminding myself of that?

**Nyanamoli:** Well, you might have to initially, to remind yourself to
recreate the right order of things—so that you can dwell on it—but after
a while, you don’t have to: it will be enough just to remember it,
because you will know how to look indirectly. You will know how to see
things without having to look at them.

People might misunderstand when I mention ‘the simultaneous presence’.
They might end up thinking it’s like two things at the same time,
momentarily present in front of you. But when I say ‘simultaneous
presence’—and that is the way the Suttas talk about it—it’s basically
two things that are present on two different levels. It doesn’t mean
they are there equally present at the same time for a second or two, and
then you must catch them both at the same time. It is not like that,
because you are just trying to catch one thing. You can divide it into a
million sub-parts—your attention is still looking at that foreground of
an object.

But when we talk about the simultaneous presence, we are saying it
endures: the peripheral endures. For example, you have an image of your
brain, but you don’t overly attend to it as a random object in the world
of which you tell yourself “This body is not mine.” It is not like that,
but you have to see that image of the brain without misconceiving it,
and then you start discerning that this is the closest you can get to
that which your life actually depends upon, that form. The closest you
can get is through these images of the brain, lungs, heart, blood, and
so on. You realize all of them stand for that, because of which you are
conscious here living this life, but you can’t possibly enter that brain
in the way of accessing it through your perception, or anything like
that. Why? Because it precedes it. But you can know that the image of
the brain that you have on that peripheral level is that because of
which you’re able to be present here and now, and attend to these
various other things that arise. In other words, when you stop thinking
about the brain, your knowledge that that’s the order of your
experience—meaning you’re undermined by the matter—doesn’t change.

That’s what I mean when I say it’s simultaneously present. You don’t
have to keep thinking about it. You can actually forget about it, but
rightly. It would basically constitute rightful forgetfulness, which is
when your forgetfulness does not induce avijjā anymore. You don’t have
to keep thinking—it’s impossible to keep thinking about everything all
the time.

**Thaniyo:** That makes sense since you can’t really think “Brain…
brain… brain” all the time.

**Nyanamoli:** Exactly, because you just keep forcing it into the
foreground, and then you fail to see what the peripheral is, which means
you have now overly misconceived the brain and you’re making it into an
object of your perception, which it is impossible for it to be. The eye
cannot see itself.

Let me say it like this: for example, you think about the brain rightly,
peripherally. You discern the image of the brain, meaning you recognize
there is the brain in here because of which my experience still exists,
and then you stop thinking about it. And then three hours later you
think about it again, and it’s important here to introduce the attitude
if you have to—eventually, you will recognize it as such. It’s
important, when three hours later you think about the brain again, you
recognize that it’s the same brain that has been here this whole time.
The fact that you forgot about it did not make it not there.

The same applies with moods or feelings. For example, you have a present
mood arisen—it’s sort of agreeable, but then you start attending to more
particular things, and of course you don’t go around thinking how
agreeable your day is. But then, later on, four or six hours later, you
look back and you remember it again—that it was agreeable. It’s the same
mood. And that’s what I mean when I say you have to let it endure. That
means that when you bring it back, you don’t make it yours, but you
recognize it as it has been enduring on its own. That’s how you start
discerning the simultaneous principle I’m talking about. Simultaneous in
the sense that the general mood—the general notion of the matter being
there—for example, in the contemplation of the body—it’s been there
enduring on its own, whether you thought about it or not. So, when you
do remember, you will eventually stop giving priority to the thought “I
remembered this” and “I’m attending to this” and “I’m practicing
this”—you will just find it. It’s simultaneously present with everything
else you do, when you don’t attend to that. It’s the necessary basis,
basically, for your action, for your choice, for your attention.

**Thaniyo:** So, we should develop the domain, the background. So, one
wants to develop it but in the process of that, he forgets about it.

**Nyanamoli:** You develop it by learning how to discern that it’s
already there.

**Thaniyo:** Sure, but then…

**Nyanamoli:** Then you have to forget about it.

**Thaniyo:** After a minute?

**Nyanamoli:** After a minute, that’s fine. Then when you remember it,
you want to abandon the attitude of “I must restart this practice
because I forgot about it.” Instead of that, you want to develop
recognition and think: “Oh, yes, it’s still there.” That’s pretty much
the crucial difference that I’m talking about. Many people say “Be here
now… be present… just feel… just this, it’s just like that” and whatnot,
but it all revolves around just telling yourself: “Come back to the
present moment, come back to the present moment.” You want to recognize
that when you come back to the present moment, you can only do so
because it was there enduring beforehand.

Then you realize you can’t forget about it even if you want to. You’re
responsible for your own ignorance, because you’re responsible for the
attitude of thinking you have to hold it in front of you and that’s the
only way for it to exist. You forget about it after a minute, then you
remember it after five minutes, and then you think “Oh, crap! I forgot
about it. I must do it again now,” as if you are the one who does it to
begin with. It is not like that! Each time that attitude arises, you
include that attitude in your mindfulness as well because it’s not
rooted in you, but it’s rooted in the enduring background.

That’s what the mind is—the ultimate background, citta nimitta. That’s
why it is said: “He knows the mind as exalted or as shrunk or as
depressed or as elated.” These states that people almost automatically
appropriate are your state of mind. As such, it endures. Five days
later, you remember it again. The only reason you can remember it, is
because it’s still there enduring to some extent. And what will that do,
this kind of practice of mindfulness? Well , you can’t be treading water
with it. If you keep doing it, it is forcing you basically to shift the
center of your experience from your sense of self into the background of
things, and even the actual things that you’re attending to, because you
realize that they’re there because of the background, you start
squeezing your own sense of self out. There is no room for it in the
experience because whether you look at the background, or whether you’re
attending to the foreground, you realize this can be done only because
these things endure on their own, beforehand.

Therefore, stop worrying about not forgetting, but instead start
focusing on discerning whenever you remember and don’t misconceive
whenever you remember. And the most fundamental misconceiving is the
idea “mine”, meaning that “I am” here, at the center—not this thing that
I remembered because of which I am in the first place.

**Thaniyo:** If I understand correctly, whatever I attend to, at any
given time, that must induce a remembering of the way things are.

**Nyanamoli:** Well , you don’t even have to say it like that, but you
can just say: “Whatever I attend to, just be aware of what I’m doing.”
Include yourself in that picture. And where that sense of self is,
that’s already where the background is. Instead of feeling that each
time you remember, you must restart the practice and then hold it as
long as you can. Then you drop that whole attitude of trying to remember
but instead, whenever you remember, even if it’s once a day, you still
don’t think: “Oh, now I remembered, I must hold it.” Instead you should
think: “I remembered it, it’s already there, arisen beforehand. Not
mine, not for me, not myself. It cannot be mine.” And that automatically
affects everything else within that background, within that peripheral.

It’s going to take time to see that because now the emphasis is on what
you attend to—that’s what matters. In practice you are thinking: “I’m
attending to this, I’m attending to this,” and then you forget and try
to remember it again. But that is not the way, because the only reason
you can attend to anything is because it is there given as an option,
which means it exists on the peripheral, where the possibilities exist.

Things are genuinely impermanent, and cannot be owned, and cannot be
controlled. But you can’t see that because you depend on telling
yourself that things are genuinely impermanent, cannot be owned and so
on. You can attend to all sorts of things, but that thing is still there
on its own, that’s the important bit. That’s how you shift it onto the
phenomenon that has arisen and is enduring, not onto you attending it.
That’s how you place yourself second basically. And when the sense of
self is second, it’s not a sense of self any more. To have the sense of
self it has to always be the first, the master.

**Thaniyo:** Then I might start thinking about other things.

**Nyanamoli:** If you start thinking about other things, you use the
same principle of allowing your mind to get established on the
significance of that peripheral, and then let it go. Let your mind think
about other things.

Basically, establishing that significance would create that enduring
context. But you don’t have to keep thinking “this is the context”,
because it’s there. You just let it endure. And then you might wonder
what to do then. You don’t do anything. You let your mind think. Just
make sure it doesn’t go into sensuality, ill-will or cruelty. That’s it.
That’s all you have to do. Just prevent it from going there. If it
doesn’t want to go there, you don’t have to do anything. That’s how you
make your own sense of self redundant.

**Thaniyo:** What about doubt?

**Nyanamoli:** That’s also how you go beyond doubt. If your mind is
established on the peripheral—upon the nature of an enduring
phenomenon—no amount of active movements of your mind, all of that is
secondary to that enduring significance that you’ve established, so you
can’t doubt it. You can doubt what you’re attending to, but the
background of your attention is that which you cannot attend to, and you
cannot doubt that if you start discerning it. If you keep confusing it
and thinking that you can attend to the background of your attention—in
the same sense you think you can see the eye because of which you
see—then you’re still affected by doubt.

That’s what Ven. Ñāṇavīra was talking about when he wrote about the
self-identity of a self-enduring phenomenon that people confuse with
their own self-identity. The identity of that thing is still there, it’s
still the same thing. In that sense, you are responsible for
establishing your mind correctly, only to let it go and allow that
establishment to endure. If done rightly it will endure. That’s how you
enter jhānas.

That’s why it was said in the suttas that a monk doesn’t think “I am
entering the jhāna now”, or “I will enter the jhāna.” But he sets up his
mind, he sets up the right significance, and then the mind gets
established upon the theme of jhāna. And that’s why, while that theme is
enduring, all that is implied is the phenomenon of the fact that nothing
that is taken as ‘mine’ can be owned. Yet it’s the reason because of
which you are there in the first place. If you establish your mind like
that, then you won’t be able to think—for as long as such a phenomenon
is enduring—“I’m doing this and that” because it’s not rooted in you
anymore—it’s rooted in a proper foundation, which is the foundation of
the inaccessible matter: the five aggregates that cannot actually be
owned.

**Thaniyo:** How do we know if the knowledge is developed sufficiently
enough?

**Nyanamoli:** Dispassion is the sign, dispassion is the result.

**Thaniyo:** Then is one always aware of the background?

**Nyanamoli:** Sure, because that’s not something you attend to.

**Thaniyo:** But then one is always aware of the background.

**Nyanamoli:** Yes, whatever that background is at the time. Hence, the
arahant is always mindful.

**Thaniyo:** It doesn’t have to be a specific background.

**Nyanamoli:** No, for as long as people think mindfulness is what you
attend to, then they can’t comprehend how an arahant can always be
mindful and not be a robot at the same time. There is always something
enduring, for as long as these aggregates don’t break apart. That’s what
the Buddha meant when he said: “Or he develops mindfulness to the extent
necessary for final knowledge.” Exactly, to the extent. all the things
that were implied in the perception of the beating heart, that’s not in
your control—yet it determines your whole life simultaneously while
you’re alive—you can go further within the same perception: What is the
characteristic? What are the nimittas of that significance of my beating
heart? It’s not in my control. So, my sense of control fundamentally
depends upon the greater domain of non-control, of that which is
inaccessible to my control. That’s nothing other than anicca. So, you
develop the perception of impermanence correctly. This thing cannot be
owned, cannot be appropriated, cannot be controlled, it’s impermanent.

**Thaniyo:** Everything that is experienced?

**Nyanamoli:** Yes, the universal characteristics are the most
universal. But as I said, sometimes the mind just won’t be getting
established upon it because it’s too subtle and it got too distracted or
whatever, so you bring it down. That’s why the Buddha had such a varied
range of different approaches. Looking at a dead corpse for example. On
some days that will not be necessary because it will be enough just to
think about the phenomenon of non-control and it will be fully
establishing dispassion, renunciation, relinquishing, and everything
else. But on other days it might be necessary. Either way, you’re
developing the same principle.

**Thaniyo:** So, to know that you’re developing correctly—when you’ve
actually got somewhere in development—is the sign of dispassion always
there?

**Nyanamoli:** If the mind is properly established… Why? Because again
you have shifted the emphasis from me and I, onto the enduring
phenomenon that exists on its own. So even when disagreeable things
arise, it becomes inconceivable to become involved in a personal manner.
It’s just like knowing: “The wind blows, the branches fall, the sun
shines, the heart beats, people shout abuse at you.” It’s on the same
level. That’s why the Buddha listed these as elements to be
endured—enduring the malicious speech, the hurtful speech and so on.

**Thaniyo:** So, with the breath, breathing is always there—intention to
breathe, to be more specific. But I can sit now and play with my breath.

**Nyanamoli:** OK. But you want to know it. Like now, for most people,
because they’re so concerned with what they attend to, even the people
who try to practice, breath is pretty much peripheral in regard to their
other actions. The breath goes into the background.

But if you bring the breath into the foreground, as in if you think “I’m
sitting here, breathing in, breathing out…”, you don’t do it in the
sense of thinking you are going to be attending to this every second.
You bring it to the foreground so that you will see the background of
breathing. For most day-to-day experience, breath is in the background.
And here you can establish significance by asking yourself if you will
be alive if the breathing stops? If your airways get blocked? No. So,
you could establish the same principle as we just did—of dispassion,
relinquishment, non-control, not-self—by seeing the background of your
breath. Or you can think: “Why don’t I refine it further and start
seeing the background of the actual act of breathing?” And that’s how
the <cite>[Ānāpānasati Sutta (MN
118)](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/MN/MN118.html)</cite> goes
where it says: “Knowingly he breathes in, knowingly he breathes out.”
And you see, actually it is not like: “I’m breathing in, I’m breathing
in, I’m breathing in” while inhaling and then, “now I’m breathing out,
breathing out, breathing out” while exhaling. That is not how it is said
there! But rather, he’s breathing in, breathing out, and he knows it,
which means now he’s discerning an even more general background to that,
because that’s what’s in front of him. He puts his mindfulness to the
fore, as the sutta says. No matter what he thinks, what matters is
knowing the background of that doing. That’s how you establish
mindfulness of breathing. Mindfulness is basically synonymous with
background, so when you say mindfulness, you say background. You can
call mindfulness of breathing as the background of breathing.

**Thaniyo:** What is that background of breathing?

**Nyanamoli:** Well, fundamentally it comes down to the knowledge of
action, any action, because breathing is an action; that would be if you
fully discerned it. But initially what it will be as the background of
breathing is the knowledge of breathing and of the necessity of breath,
the necessity of the body.

When I say the necessity of those things it means you are not necessary,
these things are necessary. It’s like narrowing down the field of your
concern. Don’t get distracted by “I must do this and that”. That’s why
the Buddha said: “When you develop this, that body you’re discerning
there is that body, the body among the bodies,” which means it’s the
body that stands for the phenomenon of the body at the time. So, you use
your breathing as a natural confinement for the concern of your thought,
and you become mindful of it properly when you start discerning the
background of that confinement. But, as I said, you discern the
confinement because breathing is already there, whether you attend to it
or not—you certainly don’t make a mechanical method out of it, thinking:
“I’ll watch my nostrils… watch my nostrils…”. There you don’t discern a
background, but you’re actively looking away from it, while you’re
actively trying to focus on what’s in front of you.

**Thaniyo:** So, what about this example of when you learn something
like 2 + 2 equals 4. You know that now, so every time you look at 2 + 2…

**Nyanamoli:** The knowledge is there. Imagine the same principle
applied to the universal nature of experience. Whenever you look at
anything that has arisen, you see its cessation. That’s the insight of
the sotapanna: “Whatever has the nature of arising…”. It doesn’t say
“whatever has arisen in front of me is impermanent.” “Whatever has the
nature of arising” means it’s already a peripheral knowledge. The nature
of a thing is something you cannot attend to. You can discern it based
on things you’re attending to. So, you discern that whatever has the
nature of arising, for that reason has to cease.

**Thaniyo:** What is the sign of “arisen”?

**Nyanamoli:** Cessation. Because of its arising, not because it’s going
to disappear, but because it has arisen. So, whenever things arise for
you, which is for as long as the five aggregates exist, you see
impermanence.

That’s why arahantship is irreversible, Right View is irreversible. You
cannot forget that, because everything contains it. That’s why it’s such
a general statement—because that’s the most accurate way you could say
it. “Whatever has the nature of arising, has the nature of ceasing.”
That’s it.

**Thaniyo:** So that significance, that sign, is always there because
whatever is manifested is always there.

**Nyanamoli:** Exactly, that is its nature. That’s why the dhammā are
the phenomena, and then the Dhamma, as in the Teaching, is the nature of
the phenomena. The phenomenology, literally—the knowledge of the
phenomena. So, whatever has the nature of manifestation, has the nature
of this teaching of the Dhamma, the nature of impermanence and so on.

In practice, you look at the breath, you contemplate the body so as to
keep discerning this nature of manifestation clearer and clearer. It’s
already there on its own, manifested. You’re not creating it by
attending to it, you can only attend to it because it’s already there
enduring. You cannot create anything from nothingness and bring it into
being because you are the result of it. Your attention is already
secondary to it, structurally, not in the sense of a sequence like 1, 2,
3. It’s all within the same arisen basis of the present form, paired
with consciousness that you cannot step outside of. Any movement you
make within it, is strictly within it. If you try to attend to that, it
would require you to step outside of it and see it as an object, but
that’s inconceivable. And if you keep doing it, it’s because you’re
misconceiving that you can do it. You want to discern these universal
characteristics of things, not by your attending to them and thinking
they exist only when you attend to them. And that’s how you uproot your
sense of self. You can’t step outside of yourself or the five
aggregates, but you can certainly stop misconceiving them, and that can
be done only from the inside.

<u>**On sensuality**</u>

**Thaniyo:** There is a Sutta from <cite>AN 4:181</cite>: “How is a
bhikkhu a long-distance shooter? Any kind of form whatsoever, past,
future, present, whatever—a bhikkhu sees all form as it really is with
correct wisdom.”

**Nyanamoli:** Yes, so shooting the peripheral discernment. For example,
within the significance of the heart you can discern even further: what
is a more refined significance than this beating heart already implied,
which is the significance of earth, water, re, air. Significance of
impermanence, non-control. So, if a bhikkhu is a long-distance shooter,
it means he doesn’t even have to go through, for example, establishing
the significance of the heart to discern these other more refined
signifcances—his mind is already developed to the level of discerning
refined significances in whatever has arisen. And these refined
significances—refined signs—are the impermanence, four great elements,
etc.

**Thaniyo:** The Sutta goes further: “And how is a bhikkhu a
sharpshooter?”

**Nyanamoli:** He goes for the significances that are fundamental to
freedom from suffering basically.

You would arrive at that through contemplating the independence of the
four great elements, your dependence on it, etc. You would eventually
drain away any conceit, any misconceiving, which will result in freedom
from suffering. Or if you shoot precisely, you go straight for freedom
from suffering, because that’s already implied.

**Thaniyo:** Because that’s like the most general recognition. Whatever
has arisen, will cease, and you develop that.

**Nyanamoli:** That’s also what it means to be paññavimutti. One who’s
liberated through wisdom because he discerns only things relevant to
liberation. He doesn’t develop all the jhānas and everything else, but
discerns the right things to the sufficient extent.

Like now when you speak about it, it will be quite an abstract thing.
But the only reason it’s abstract is because the mind hasn’t been
developed in regard to that abstraction, so start developing it. Start
discerning it in arisen things that endure for you, in front of you,
throughout your daily life—because these things are there. They will
remain abstract for as long as you don’t see them as they are—so you
abstract them, literally.

**Thaniyo:** And then the Sutta goes further: “And how is a bhikkhu one
who splits a great body? Here, a bhikkhu splits the great mass of
ignorance. Possessing these four qualities he’s worthy of offerings. And
how is a bhikkhu skilled in places? He’s virtuous, seeing the danger in
the slightest fault…”

**Nyanamoli:** That’s also where you see the danger—it’s in that
peripheral. The danger is in the background—the danger is the
implication of what’s in front of you. The danger is the context that
you create. A puthujjana doesn’t see the danger in sensuality, but if he
starts thinking about it, discerning it, he’ll get to see it because it
is actually dangerous. That’s how you can see the danger in the
slightest fault, and not become neurotically obsessed about every little
thing that’s in front of you, fearing it—because that’s not where the
danger is. That’s like the simile of the beautiful, tasty beverage: you
can’t see the poison in it, but you know it is there—which means
ultimately the danger of sensuality is rooted in the background, and can
never come in front of you and be seen in the same manner as you see an
object of your senses.

That’s why people are intoxicated with sensuality, despite the
experience always proving that it’s actually painful—you only regard
things as real if they’re the things that you can see through your
senses, usually. So, you want to discern it. And that danger, as I said,
never leaves the peripheral, never becomes something you can see with
your eyes. You still see the beautiful object, but now you have fully
understood and fully discerned the danger.

You have to know that poison is there, and you have to stop ignoring the
fact that poison is there—and then you get to see that whatever is
beautiful, you fully understood it as being dangerous, that ‘this will
kill me’. But you can’t see the poison and you can’t extract it and then
say, “look, this is the poison! See?”. Because that would then imply
that other things you can see don’t have that poison. Poison is actually
in everything you see, hear, smell, taste, touch. Everything that’s
agreeable contains that poison because it’s agreeable. You could think
that the agreeability of things is what poison is. But that in itself is
not dangerous, is it? What’s dangerous is you carelessly ingesting the
poison. You carelessly welcoming the agreeability, delighting in it,
saying ‘yes’ to it.

**Thaniyo:** So, the danger is not the result.

**Nyanamoli:** No, exactly. The danger is that significance of it. If
you take it, then danger befalls you.

**Thaniyo:** We’d usually think that danger of sensuality comes only if
you overindulge.

**Nyanamoli:** No, no, no, that’s basically on the level of perception.
I suppose someone who’s completely unrestrained has to start rounding it
up in such a crude manner.

Such kind of reflections that a complete assutava puthujjana will have
to go through in order to begin, but that’s not the danger. That’s why
the Buddha would say you’re not free from sensuality until the danger
becomes apparent. And the danger does not become apparent if, for you,
to even get a sense of danger, you need to go through the motions of
repeating how dissatisfying sensuality actually is, and so on—that’s on
the level of rationalizing.

It can help somebody who has absolutely no ground for practice, but you
want to go way beyond that—you want to be able to get to the point where
seeing the agreeable equals knowing the danger. That’s why the Buddha
said knowledge is secondary to perception, but you can equally have
perception without knowledge being present there. So, knowledge is not
in perception, which means you can’t perceive the knowledge, but you can
know that which you perceive at the same time.

In the case of a cup or drink in front of you—you’re drinking it and
it’s very good; people told you it’s healthy. People told you it’s going
to prolong your life and cure cancer, and it’s amazing. But then
somebody comes and tells you that it’s actually going to kill you, going
to shorten your life. See, both could be right, meaning you don’t know
which one is right; but the fact that it’s been placed in doubt that
it’s good for you is actually enough for you to back o from it. You
think that it is better not to take any chances. Perhaps you don’t need
a longer life, because it might even actually shorten it. Let alone if
it actually becomes apparent that the second guy was right and it will
kill you quicker, it will ruin you. But that which is in front of you
hasn’t changed—your experience of it is still the same.

**Thaniyo:** So, it might harm you.

**Nyanamoli:** The fact that you don’t know for yourself whether it’s
good for you—that’s already dangerous. And if you start thinking like
that, the danger will become apparent—the danger that is actually
there—but you can’t see that until you arrive at it, which means you
can’t know that for yourself.

You have to take it on trust that sensuality is dangerous, and start
regarding it as such and, because it is dangerous, your way of regarding
it will eventually mirror how it is and you’ll get to understand it.

And now, the peripheral of that perception of sensuality is the
knowledge of the danger. It’s the significance of the danger, it’s the
implication of the danger.

**Thaniyo:** But if you don’t have the knowledge of the danger, what are
you looking for?

**Nyanamoli:** Well, first if you don’t discern the phenomenon of
sensuality, you’re not going discern the background of the danger. In
the same sense mindfulness of breathing is like a confinement that
represents all the other actions you do in your life on account of your
breathing, but then you’re not doing that confinement. You want to
discern the background of that confinement. Then that makes everything
inferior to that even clearer. So, in the same sense, you want to
discern the extent of sensuality in order to discern the background of
the danger. That’s why the Buddha would always start by saying: “The
gratification of sensuality has been understood, the danger has become
apparent.” He wouldn’t say that the danger has become apparent, and then
he understood. But by understanding the extent of sensuality, by
understanding its gratification, then the background of that, the
danger, becomes clear. But not before you understand the extent of
physical pleasures, craving for physical pleasures. And you can only
understand the extent if you start looking for it. And the gratification
of sensuality is not in the particular engagement of this sensuality,
it’s in the background of your particular engagement.

There are obviously kinds of sensuality that you cannot be mindful
of—the ones that take the mind too far out, such as non-celibacy,
killing, lying, stealing. You abandon that; but now you have to eat.
Within that, you’re going to get pleasant tastes in your mouth. And then
you might think: “Oh, I must spit this out because it’s too pleasant.”
In that case you don’t see the gratification: you fear everything,
you’re spitting out the object, but that’s not what sensuality is.
Sensuality is your attitude in regard to the object you’re attending to.
If all you do is attend to things, you’re never going to see your
attitude in regard to it. Now that you live restrained, you’re not
breaking vinaya rules, you see the danger in the slightest fault. Then
when you encounter agreeable things that are a basis for sensuality,
that’s when you start looking for the background to it. You allow it to
arise while the taste is in your mouth. The Buddha didn’t say “spit out
the food!” But he said we should eat mindfully, meaning eat while you’re
aware of the background of your pleasant taste. Don’t get absorbed in
the pleasant taste. And try to not get absorbed by the pleasant taste by
focusing on other things, or twisting their tongue to avoid the taste
and whatnot. No, that’s equally on the same footing as where the taste
is. You want to just know the background of the pleasant taste—that’s
already clarifying the extent of gratification. The clearer the extent
of the perception of gratification becomes, the clearer the significance
of the danger. Hence, the gratification became clear, the danger has
been seen, has become apparent, and then the way out from sensuality and
gratification is automatic.

So, first, you have to be restrained, not giving in to distraction. If
you intentionally give in to sensuality, you can’t establish that
mindfulness, because your intention has already distorted it—it’s
already inverted, perverted. But if agreeable things that are a base for
sensuality come to you, without your intention necessarily being rooted
in seeking the pleasure in them, that’s where you start discerning the
peripheral, that’s where the gratification of sensuality becomes
clearer. That’s why sila has to come first, it’s just not optional. But
the problem is when people see that sila comes first and then believe
that after it comes the denial of anything pleasant, even if it’s not
sought by you; that becomes the next attitude. They think: “This taste
is way too nice, so I only eat things that I hate.” But you’re basically
misconceiving sensuality. You think sensuality is in the actual taste,
and you think that by avoiding taste, you avoid sensuality. No, you just
obscure it further.

**Thaniyo:** If you were free from sensuality, you would be what?

**Nyanamoli:** You’d be an anagami. If you don’t have the right view,
you could be free from sensuality and then you would need very, very
little instruction to get the right view because you’ve already done 80%
of the work: 80% of the fundamental existential distractions which are
the senses. That would have been tamed and surmounted and understood.

**Thaniyo:** Because if you see things, knowing that whatever has
arisen, the background is “it will cease,” and then you turn your mind
to what is the extent of sensuality…

**Nyanamoli:** Exactly, you see the same principle. And also those who
don’t see that principle, but have seen the sensuality, they have
removed pretty much the sole reason for not seeing impermanence.

Virtually, sensuality is the main reason because it results in
distraction and everything else. So, you have removed that, you have
understood that, you’ve developed your mind in regard to it. You have
seen the peripheral of that domain, you’ve seen the danger in it, and
then you just need somebody to tell you what the impermanence of
phenomena is, and you would immediately go straight to anagami, or even
arahant because you’ve already done all the work.

**Thaniyo:** So, you’re saying that the danger of sensuality is being
pulled in the foreground.

**Nyanamoli:** Yes. See, all that is accurate, but you want to see that
not as a statement that you made, but actually see it coming from that
sensuality. But in order to see it, you have to be clarifying that
understanding, even those statements, for yourself. The more you clarify
it, the more of the significance is being clarified. And then you will
get to recognize it. But the fundamental danger in sensuality is exactly
that: you cannot remain not pulled, not distorted by the foreground. You
cannot.

You’re only free when you surmount the danger. You’re only free when you
surmount ignorance. So, if you don’t surmount it, you’re not free. And
that’s the danger of saṃsāra. Not free means saṃsāra.

**Thaniyo:** Am I not then seeing the danger in sensuality, if I see
that?

**Nyanamoli:** Well , you’re seeing it to some extent, sure, but you
want to see that to the point where any desire toward it has faded
away—towards sensual enjoyment—, and it will fade away when the
perception of danger—that background implication, significance of
danger—is developed to the extent necessary, whereby no matter how much
you get distracted, you’ll never, ever go back to the point of being so
distracted that you actually want sensuality.

In the same sense of when you vomit food that you ate, you’ll never ever
get so hungry to eat that stuff that’s mouldy and filthy and mixed with
soil. It’s just not perceived as edible anymore. That’s how far you want
to go. Where sensuality has ceased to be perceived as worthy of
engagement, where it’s actually the opposite. Non-engagement is what’s
worthy, non-engagement is what freedom is for you. Engagement is death
for you, results in death, implies death. It makes you liable to death.
Literally, you wouldn’t be killed if somebody comes and shoots you in
the head. That’s not death. Death is sending your mind back down to the
senses. That’s how you get killed. Because if you take your mind away
from the senses—you surmount sensuality—even if somebody comes and
shoots you in the head, you are not killed. So that’s why the Buddha
said that those who are not mindful—those who are not properly
established upon the peripheral background discernment of that
significance—they’re as if already dead.

**Thaniyo:** Because if you see the extent of sensuality, then you know
very well when you step into it.

**Nyanamoli:** Yes, it cannot be done accidentally. It’s always a
choice. If you’re aware of the background, you’re aware of being about
to make a choice. You’re aware of the possibilities to choose, which
means you realize you’re already responsible; you’re already choosing
the direction of sensuality even before you directly engage with it.

**Thaniyo:** So, basically seeing the choice of sensuality is also
seeing the extent of sensuality.

**Nyanamoli:** Sure. Seeing the extent of sensuality, seeing the
background of sensuality. Discerning gradually the significance of it.
Taking responsibility for the choice. That’s another approach to the
same thing.
