---
archive_url: "https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20190428%20-%2075hh%20-%20Appointment%20with%20death%20%28Marananussati%29%20-%20Thag%206.13.mp3"
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
category: Transcriptions
date: 2019-04-28
description: a summarized transcription
doc_url: "https://pathpress.org/appointment-with-death/"
episode: 75
layout: post
title: Appointment with Death
youtube_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Xy01jkEsnQ"
---

a summarized transcription

by **Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero**

[\[video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Xy01jkEsnQ) [\[audio\]](https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20190428%20-%2075hh%20-%20Appointment%20with%20death%20%28Marananussati%29%20-%20Thag%206.13.mp3)

**Thaniyo**: I was wondering if you could speak about the contemplation
of death—how should we think about death?

<div lang="en">

> The world is beaten down by death  
> and surrounded by old age.  
> The dart of craving has laid it low,  
> and it’s always fuming with desire.
>
> — <cite>Thag 6:13</cite>, 2nd verse

</div>

**Nyanamoli**: Walking, standing, sitting or lying down, you should be
dwelling on the ultimate context, which is what death is. It’s the
ultimate context of your life—it’s a non-negotiable context. Because
people might think: “I must be going through the motions and methods of
practicing mindfulness of death, thinking about it when I’m walking,
sitting…” That’s true only in the sense that you need to discern the
most fundamental, always present possibility of death, which is what
makes it such an ultimate context of your life. Everything else within
your life can come and go—what has been or could have not been—all these
things. But one thing is for sure: when life is there, death is
guaranteed, as the final outcome of it.

The reason why people would be pressed and oppressed—by their desires,
by their intentions, unskillful actions—is because they turn a blind eye
to this very factual liability to death. If a person were not turning a
blind eye to it, that’s already something that’s going to start shaping
their life differently, because pretty much everything unwholesome that
a person can engage with is as a result of ignoring the fact that they
will die, that they will not always be healthy, not always be young. But
being intoxicated by those things, you entertain those desires, you want
more of them. But all you need do is uncover that fundamental context of
certainty of death, and it will automatically prevent you from running
too far down the rabbit hole of desires. And that’s what mindfulness of
death means.

Obviously, you can do that on a very loose level, but you can start
narrowing it down and you realize that you might not see the end of this
day. Not necessarily becoming neurotic about it, thinking “I will die… I
will die.” But just recognize that that possibility is so immediate that
you might not see the end of the day—the end of the morning. You might
not have enough time to finish your meal. You might not have enough time
to breathe out once you breathe in—that’s fundamentally how much you’re
not in control of your life. That doesn’t mean that you should be
repeating to yourself that you will die every second of the day. That’s
not contemplation of death, that’s just a mechanical repetition of the
idea of what death is for you. You want to understand the context of
death, which is that ultimate peripheral context to everything you
actually do in your life.

Hence the mindfulness—whenever there is a principle of the peripheral,
there is a principle of mindfulness. Peripheral awareness. So, by being
mindful of the context of death with regard to your day-to-day life,
that’s already the practice of mindfulness. If a person wants to start
practicing that contemplation on death as meditation, as with any other
meditation, withdraw yourself from distractions, from company, and think
about it. If you don’t know where to start, just think about the nature
of death that is inescapable to you. Then you take that further and
start thinking: “OK, so what would be the real significance of this life
that is fully under the control of death?” Because whatever you do in
this life cannot help you step outside the liability to death. It
basically cannot free you from death. Then you realize that that order
cannot change—it doesn’t matter what you do, doesn’t matter what you
distract yourself with, doesn’t matter what you accomplish with this
life. Fundamentally that whole thing—as much as you developed it, as far
as it proliferated—is still equally within the domain of death, and you
can’t escape that. The practice then would be establishing the right
order, that it doesn’t matter what you do in this life fundamentally,
you are liable to sickness, aging, and death. That context is not
something you need to keep in front of you, thinking “I will die… I will
die.” Just keep it at the back of your mind, where it is knowing: “While
I’m doing this, this and this, I might die.”

It’s highly unlikely that I will die as a result of sitting in my room
reading a book, but death is equally present there because my life
depends upon working organs, beating heart, breathing lungs. So, you
want to practice mindfulness of death to see that your life is
undermined by the random operation of organs that you have no control
over.

**Thaniyo**: What about this example? You can be called to work at any
point—you will be called—because you’ve chosen that job. Whatever you do
has to be done with that in the back of your mind.

**Nyanamoli**: That’s what I mean by context, exactly. But it’s not a
context you can be indifferent about, because it’s the context that
undermines and affects your life. The simile of that would be, for
example, you have a job interview. You have one shot at something that
can change your life in a week’s time. Whatever you do that week, this
will be at the back of your mind because it is so important—there is a
degree of concern with regard to it. Now imagine if that one shot is
basically death—it’s not a random interview that can go either way, it’s
as fundamental as losing your life. So, you realize what kind of concern
that would be, peripherally, and how much influence that would have on
your choices and decisions in this life. And so the *Dhammapada* verse
about anger, where it says: “Those who quarrel, they forget that we are
all going to die.” Basically, we are all sentenced to death in this
life. And because of that, quarrels persist, and quarrels
develop—because if you don’t forget the ultimate appointment with death
that you have.

Also, you can have a job appointment at an exact time, exact day, but
the appointment with death is uncertain in the sense that it can arise
at any given time. So, you realize that appointment might be today,
might be tomorrow, might be in 10 years’ time—you cannot forget about it
because it can be here the next moment—because if you forget about it
you might fail. Whatever you do in this life, you do it on the basis of
not forgetting about the ultimate context of your liability to die—the
certain possibility of death. And you can already see how much less you
would be able to be pulled by the fleeting desires of the senses,
distractions and so on—they just would not have any value.

And again, if a person has any doubt about it, just recollect when you
feared for your life—for a period of time on account of anything,
illness or an accident or whatever—and see how much interest you had in
the world during that period of time. You’ll see—very little. You were
not enjoying your food, you were not finding solace in friends and
distractions, parties or whatever else. This was just the most pressing
thing. So, it’s basically reconnecting to that context that is there, so
you don’t have to fabricate it, you just have to stop covering it up
with that constant influx of sensuality and intentions for distraction.
So, if you always feel like you’re on call—that you might be called upon
by death—that already means you develop, fundamentally, that proper
context, which now shapes your decisions. It makes you non-careless with
regard to things in front of you in your life.

And that’s essentially what mindfulness of death is. Mindfulness of the
certain. You might worry: “Today I have to do this, work in the garden,
do this or that…” All these things can stay, but you would see how much
less emotionally pulled or affected you would be by any of those
things—whether they change, whether they’re the way you wanted them to
be, or they go the other way—you wouldn’t be affected. Why? Because you
weren’t there with them. Why? Because you’re concerned about death.

But that kind of practice can be a bit too hard for some people—that
concern can overwhelm you. But if it doesn’t, you could see how quickly
you would develop dispassion with regard to everything that comes your
way, and that’s why the Buddha praised it as pretty much the quickest
way to free your mind from any unwholesome states, ignorance, avoidance
of responsibility and so on. But if it’s too much, then practice
mindfulness of breathing because it results in the same, as we spoke
about in the other talks. You realize that your fully controlled act of
breathing depends on things that are not your own while you’re
controlling it, which means your sense of control is undermined,
fundamentally dependent upon things you cannot control.

**Thaniyo**:

<div lang="en">

> Others don’t understand  
> that our lives must have limits.  
> The clever ones who know this  
> settle their quarrels right away.
>
> — <cite>Thag 8:1</cite>, 5th verse

</div>

Are you’re saying the most important thing while you’re alive is the
fact that you have an appointment?

**Nyanamoli**: Yes, and you can also use that in the reverse order, and
you can see, if you think you are practicing mindfulness of death and
making the effort, then you should ask yourself: “Is my mind getting
angry? Is my mind getting lustful?” If the answer is yes, it means you
haven’t established the context of death. If you had, these things would
not be able to arise—let alone persist.

The only way you can be triggered by trivial matters or non-trivila
matters— the only way you could be emotionally triggered by anything, is
if you have lost the context of certain death, that’s yours and yours
only. Then literally nothing else matters because everything is within
that context. Everything. There’s nothing you can do, say or think that
will not be within the context of life that’s undermined by death—it
just cannot be.

The practice of mindfulness of death is really just clarifying the
understanding of that inherent context in whatever you do—the context of
that ultimate final cessation that you cannot even conceive escaping
from, because when you think about escaping from it, the thoughts of
that escape are within the context of death. So, you’re fully enclosed
by it. That’s why it can be quite frightening, like being buried alive
for example. You’re still alive, but you realize that escape from this
is inconceivable.

There’s the simile that the Buddha gave to that king, how would it be if
big mountains or an army were coming from all four directions towards
him. Mountains enclosing you, and you can’t escape, you can’t fight
against it. What would you do then? And the king answers that he would
re-evaluate his life and maybe become a monk and try and free himself
internally.

And simply the habit of ignoring one’s death maintains that ignorance.
You might feel like you’re sheltered from death, until, of course,
circumstances remind you that it’s otherwise. Until you have little
pangs of anxiety that you can’t get rid of for the rest of your life.
Why? Because you never admitted to yourself what’s obvious right from
the start—that, as soon as you’re born, you’re old enough to die, pretty
much. The second you’re conceived, you’re liable to death. And that’s
it. It’s really not even a negotiable context. But people might say:
“You shouldn’t be thinking about this because you won’t enjoy life.”
Well, you won’t enjoy life in an unwholesome sense, but you’ll certainly
appreciate it in a wholesome sense—as a possibility for developing
wisdom that will then free you from death, as a possibility for doing
good and maybe showing others who want to hear. There is still plenty
you can do in this life within the context of death, that won’t be as
futile as simply distracting yourself from the obvious truths.

If you close yourself from the reality of death, it will be out of fear.
Then you might not be able to take it all in at once, which is fine, but
you should certainly not develop a view that you shouldn’t be taking it
in at all because it’s making you scared. You need to be developing
yourself with regard to that which scares you, whereby you won’t run
away from that which frightens you. And that’s how you get to understand
it.

**Thaniyo**: The Buddha says that a monk should think: “I could die
today, a snake could bite me, I could fall down, the elements might
change and destroy me, my body might get sick, centipedes…”

**Nyanamoli**: He thinks these things to re-evoke the context of “I am
susceptible to die at any given moment.” Having established that
context, he doesn’t need to keep thinking about it because now, whatever
he does, he already maintains the context, because that already is
implying it can end at any moment because you can die.

Mindfulness, properly developed, is on the level of knowledge. It means
the thing is there present, the context is there present because you
know it. And that’s why mindfulness, memory and recollection go
hand-in-hand. It’s not a mechanical focusing technique that you will be
doing on account of different meditation ‘objects’—it’s really
developing the knowledge of the context. It means to be watchful, so
that you don’t forget about it.

I think Ajahn Chah gave a similar example. It’s like a mother who has to
do work outside and leaves the baby inside. So, she’s out there only for
the amount of time she needs to finish the work. She doesn’t linger, she
doesn’t forget about her baby, she doesn’t distract herself from it. It
means whatever she’s doing still maintains the importance of that
certain context. And when she’s done, she goes back to the baby. And
that’s like the development of mind, the development of mindfulness—the
importance of that watchfulness.

Why would I then be breaking the precepts, why would I then be careless,
when I might die within 10 seconds? My heart might stop. You might
think: “It probably won’t.” But it might. That’s more than enough for
that right concern. The right type of concern. You see, the Noble
Eightfold Path—Right View, Right Intention and so on—you could say that
the entire Noble Eightfold Path is predicated upon developing right
concern. Being concerned rightly, becoming aware of that existential
anxiety or dread, whatever you want to call it. But you could say it’s a
right concern that comes from right responsibility, and then the Right
View will come out of it. And that’s what the Buddha meant when he said:
“I’m teaching suffering and freedom from it.” That first means you need
to know how to start suffering properly—the right concern, the right
displeasure. The nature of knowing “Hold on, this is not a choice, this
is not negotiable either.” It cannot be compared to other concerns, to
other people—it’s just mine and mine only. And this is the only thing
worth dealing with—the only thing you can deal with, truly. So,
developing the right concern develops the Noble Eightfold Path.

To practice mindfulness of death—again, just sit quietly and start
thinking, for example, about your beating heart or your breathing lungs.
Don’t negate anything—there’s nothing to negate. Just be aware that you
are breathing now, but you might not be able to.

**Thaniyo**: That’s the practice of trying to think about the different
ways that you could die, or death could happen.

**Nyanamoli**: Yes, but that can only be indirect. See, that’s the
thing: people only regard things that they can think about actually
(directly in front of them) as something that they develop. No, you want
to be discerning the context of what’s in front of you, and if you keep
bringing that context centrally in front of you that then means that the
context of that is not in front of you. As in there is something
peripheral to whatever is in front of you. And the peripheral is what
you want to discern. Like what we spoke about in the talk “Peripheral
Awareness.” So, when you’re thinking about death, you can’t be just
visualizing how you’re dying, because that’s not what death is for you
at the time—that’s a particular exemplification of that possibility, but
you’re not understanding the certainty of it because certainty of death,
of the possibility of death, is on the level of the context.

**Thaniyo**: So, could you think, in whatever situation, how is it
possible for me to die, or how is the possibility of death present?

**Nyanamoli**: You might have to start like that and then you’d get a
sense of concern, and then you recognize that it’s that concern that
needs to be developed. It must not be distracted from, must not be
covered up, must not be ignored. You must not be trying to get rid of it
either. Or this anxiety and concern, thinking: “I must get rid of it, I
must get rid of it.” It’s establishing the concern, the context of death
and then allowing it to endure. Because, through allowing it to endure,
you don’t need to worry about whatever is in front of you, because it’s
going to be kept in check by the fundamental concern of liability to
death, which is a concern based on dispassion.

**Thaniyo**: So, just as a contemplation, whatever you’re doing, try to
see that possibility of death therein. Like, I’m sitting now, so how
could death come to me? I could fall off my chair, hit my head…

**Nyanamoli**: Yes, I understand what you’re saying, but the point I’m
making is that you can do that only initially before it becomes that
mechanical visualization of how you might die, and you lose the
connection with it. That’s why you can’t just be focused on what you’re
going to think—you have to focus on that emotional background of being
liable to death, in which case you don’t need to think particularly “I
will die because my heart will stop, or I’ll fall off the chair”. You
just need to think “I will die; I could die,” and you already feel it.

**Thaniyo**: So, it’s about picking up the sign.

**Nyanamoli**: Picking up the sign, exactly. The theme, the context, the
peripheral of the actual possibilities of death. And that’s going to be
a kind of initially unpleasant concern. Afterwards, the displeasure of
that concern disappears because you realize it’s inconceivable for it to
be otherwise. You might have apprehension and so on, but none of that
would be fear and dread and pain at the prospect of death. Why? Because
you’re not intoxicated with life as you were before. And you are not
intoxicated because you stopped maintaining the intoxication, and that
intoxication is maintained through ignoring the concern about the life
that’s liable to death. So yes, if you want to do meditation on death,
think about your beating heart—you can hear it, you can feel it
beating—but can you have any intentional say in it? You realize no. If
this thing stops—in the same sense that a branch falls, a cup gets
knocked over—the heart stops. You realize the heart is on the level of
these random things in the world that can just change. Because of the
elements, because of the wind, because of whatever. But if that does
happen, my life is over. So, my life entirely—my sense of mastery, my
sense of control—depends on something as silly as a cup being knocked
over, a valve just going ‘boop’. A pump just ceasing to pump or getting
blocked. If the pump gets blocked for 10 seconds, that might be enough
to kill me. And it is inconceivable to have a say in that.

But obviously the first reaction to that is just this overwhelming
concern, and because of that, people feel fully justified in thinking “I
must not think about this.” But once you get used to it, that concern
cannot overwhelm you, and literally all you have to do is remember it,
and you’re fully back in the proper practice of that recollection of
death. Not through randomly visualizing possibilities of dying. Just
thinking “My body is a fundamental basis for my whole life, my whole
intentions, my past, my future—for everything.” Yet it’s a basis that is
fully accidental and liable to elements and one cannot even conceive
having any remote input into that domain, or that environment. And that
prevents you from appropriating your own life, your own intentions, your
own sense of control. That’s why, if you’re not overwhelmed by fear and
anxiety, and you persevere through it, and you fully maintain this
context, dispassion is the automatic result—arahantship. “Die before you
die,” as Ajahn Chah said.

**Thaniyo**: So, what about observing others, or contemplating death by
looking at others dying?

**Nyanamoli**: Same, same. If you use that to re-evoke concern for your
own life and death as an emotional context, so that you realize “I
better deal with this while I can”, then it’s fine. But if you only use
it for some sort of keeping it at arm’s length, so to speak, not really
allowing it to come in because it’s going to overwhelm you and you’re
just trying to observe and learn through observation, that’s not death
that you are learning about—you’re learning about the external
manifestation of someone else’s death. But unless you allow it to remind
you—to reconnect you with your own certain death, impending
death—there’s no real benefit to it. And that’s exactly how people can
be dealing with death, on a daily basis, and still remain fully
inauthentic, fully cover up their own death, and be passionate about
life. They can work in a morgue or whatever, and it might hit them
initially, and then they just cover it up and now it’s just cadavers,
basically. You don’t even see that as a representation of the life that
you’re partaking in. So, that’s what I mean, you must stop keeping it at
arm’s length.

If you don’t know how to deal with it, not keeping it at arm’s length,
it’s going to overwhelm you. That’s why it’s not optional for people who
don’t know how to deal with it, to keep it at arm’s length. That’s the
only means of self-preservation that they know. And that’s why it’s
going to be very frightening and scary when even that gets taken
away—when they’re actually dying—as that king became aware when the
Buddha explained this to him. That’s why those people who would
understand what the Buddha was teaching would freak out thinking “This
will kill us!” And the Buddha said, yes, for any mind that hasn’t been
restrained—that still values passion, life—and thinks: “This is mine and
I am,” these truths will be frightening, terrifying, overwhelming. They
will fall on the ground, beat their breast, pull their hair, fully
despair—because they realize this is inescapable. The only way to escape
is to stop appropriating it internally. But in order to stop
appropriating it, you need to stop appropriating everything—your likes
and your dislikes. You have to see them with wisdom and fully understand
them.

**Thaniyo**:

<div lang="en">

> The rain saturates things that are covered up;  
> it doesn’t saturate things that are open.  
> Therefore you should open up a covered thing,  
> so the rain will not saturate it.
>
> — <cite>Thag 6:13</cite>, 1st verse

</div>

So now what you’re saying… because it sounds strange: “*the rain
saturates things that are covered up.*”

**Nyanamoli**: You haven’t given them a chance to dry.

**Thaniyo**: But open it up and it won’t get saturated.

**Nyanamoli**: You will get affected by the rain, as in you’re going to
get affected by death—or even by anything unpleasant— basically for as
long as you’re covering things up from yourself. That’s what I mean, all
these truths are there, obvious in a way, but you need to make the
effort of undoing the cover-up for them to be discerned. So, it’s not
like finding a new way out, it’s basically just stopping covering up
what’s obvious. The certainty of death, the certainty of non-control,
the certainty of change.

You realize these things arise through your ignoring them, i.e. covering
them up. Then you become liable, saturated by the rain—by greed, by
despair, by sickness, aging, and death—by everything else that befalls
you. It affects you because it’s covered up there and it sinks into it,
it stays with it. It doesn’t go through it, because that’s the point:
all these things remain the same for an *arahant*, but he’s not affected
by it, because he stopped covering these things up from himself. That’s
what I mean when I say self-transparency. If something’s covered up,
it’s not transparent, you can’t see through it. Self-transparency is
developed by uncovering things for yourself. Whenever you want to engage
in sensuality or do something out of ill-will, wait—remind yourself of
the fundamental context of liability to death, and you realize this is
not worth the effort. It simply isn’t. If I tell you: “Go into this
place, go in and it’s going to be the greatest sensual satisfaction of
every sense you can imagine. But there’s also a 99% chance you’re going
to die”—no amount of enticement would make you enter because you know
it’s not worth it. Or if I tell you: “Go in there, enjoy food and
whatever else, but at the end of it, within half an hour, you’ll be
dead. But if you don’t go in it, you live longer,” you won’t go in.
Because suddenly that whole enjoyment of sensual distraction and
pleasure is replaced by an immediate, direct mirroring of the
context—that it’s within death. “If I do this, I’m dead. If I don’t do
it, I’m not dead.” Or, if somebody tells you that you’re terminal and
have three days to live, and today you had plans for tomorrow—hanging
out with your friends at some great party, careless drinking, whatever.
And then later on today you find out that you have three days to live.
Would you still have the interest to go around just carelessly partying
with random people? No, you would be concerned about seeing if there’s
anything you can do before you die, or to try to prevent yourself from
dying.

Is there anything that can make a difference to that? And you realize
that is always the case, that’s always the context. That time is too
short because you can die, you will die at any given period in your
life—there’s no such thing as too soon. That’s why the Buddha said “Time
is too short, don’t be negligent before it’s too late.” So, the context
of death immediately devalues, takes value away from, anything sensual,
anything based on ill-will—because there you go, you have access to all
of this, but death is waiting for you at the end of it. You could think
“I’m not going to do it then.” Well, it’s exactly the same principle
that applies to your life—whatever you do in this life, death waits
above you. Then you automatically become more aware, just through
discerning that context, nothing else. You remembered the appointment,
the impending appointment that can be activated at any time. Maybe in 50
years, maybe in 5 minutes. Does that make you concerned? Yes. Why? Would
you be concerned about something that has no value to you, like some
piece of rock if it gets destroyed? No, you have no emotional connection
with it, so you couldn’t care less if it gets destroyed.

So, now if there is concern about you being destroyed, you realize there
is a certain emotional connection with this. But is that emotional
connection justified? That’s what you start uncovering. Your sense of
entitlement to the appropriation of your own feelings, your own
intentions, your own sensual pleasures. You start uncovering it, you
realize this is not justified because if these things were truly
yours—if you were truly the master, the controller—they would not be
liable to death. So that’s like the three divine messengers—old age,
sickness and death—they’re telling you what’s beneath, what you refuse
to admit to yourself. They’re conveying to you that message—but you can
only fully grasp it if you start uncovering it, drying it up.

If you want to meditate on it, set aside half an hour or whatever you
have without any distractions, think about your liability to death until
you develop that context that slightly (or not so slightly) concerns
you, and then just allow it to endure. If you’re thinking, “What do I do
next?” Nothing. All you do is make sure that this context remains
transparent for this half hour that you’re meditating, nothing else. So,
if your thoughts start coming, you let them, while you still keep a
corner of your eye on that context. If you go away and realize you
forgot, then you go back to the context. And again, just let your mind
start going again, but not losing sight of the context. That’s the
practice of mindfulness that results in samādhi, which then feeds
mindfulness—because you’re learning how to not forget about the context,
even when other things are happening, and that’s life. So, whatever’s
happening in your day-to-day life, then you still have that context at
the back of your mind. That is the unshakeable mindfulness, what the
Buddha meant by it. That is the proper *maranānussati*.

Whether you’re eating, taking food, or breathing in, breathing out, the
context remains at the back, and you’ve not lost connection with it. It
doesn’t mean you must have it all the time in front of you, quite the
opposite. It means you should be able to go as far as you want, but you
still don’t completely lose sight of it.

If you think “have I lost sight of it?”, then check if there’s greed,
aversion, or delusion in your mind—is there desire for distraction,
carelessness, sensuality, ill-will, anger? If yes, you can’t say you’re
rooted in the context anymore. When you’re rooted in the context, these
things cannot arise. Amidst sensuality, amidst irritable things, they
can’t arise, because they require passion, and passion and awareness of
the context of death are mutually exclusive. Passion requires ignorance
of the fact that this is all subject to certain destruction—but if you
don’t ignore that anymore, it means you can’t engage in passion anymore.

That’s what the Buddha meant when he said those people who are not
mindful—as in those who are not aware of that context—are as if dead
already. They’re fully under that weight of death. The only way to not
partake in it, to not be affected by it, is to fully understand that
context of death. So, by being unmindful, you’re fully subscribed, fully
covered up, fully cocooned in that liability of certain death. It means
you’re as if dead—it doesn’t matter if it’s in five minutes or fifty
years.

The true meaning of life would be that which is not permeable by death.
That which is not subject to death, that would be the true life that is
beyond death. But you realize, only the understanding of death can be
beyond death, everything else is within it. So, if you have no
understanding of death, that means your whole life is already as if you
were dead.

Hence, mindfulness is the path to the deathless—peripheral awareness of
that context will take you out of the confinement of it, through
understanding. Not like you’re going to develop something outside of
it—that’s impossible. You’re just going to lose any passion, any
appropriation, any relationship with it—with everything that’s liable to
death, which is the five aggregates, your experience as a whole, your
life, past, future—all of it. It’s not about destroying and not having
it arise because it’s something you’re experiencing, which means it’s
another thing that has arisen for you. It’s about removing the emotional
connection and appropriation of it. And you will know you’re removing it
because if you think about losing your life, is there concern arising,
is there fear, is there worry? If not, it means you’re not holding to
anything, even if death comes the next second.

If you’re practicing meditation like this, you allow it to endure, for
half an hour, forty minutes, an hour. And then when you’re not
meditating, you still allow it to endure when it’s there, and if it’s
not there as much, you try to bring it back, even while you have to do
other things. Because nothing in the world is an excuse for ignoring the
fact that death is certain. There’s absolutely no excuse for that.
Whatever you’re engaged in, you make sure you keep a corner of your eye
on that fundamental context. And that’s what you’re emulating and
developing in a more controlled environment, which is what meditation
is. Not the controlled environment of a mechanical method, but the
controlled environment of reflexion, and discerning the signs and tokens
of how it feels to be liable to death at any given moment. You want to
see it on that peripheral level and just be aware of it. Now the mind
starts thinking about things you have to do, that happened yesterday—but
if that context is there, there will be no passion in regard to it. You
start losing the context, you re-establish it.

**Thaniyo**: There’s also an idea that one must practice so that when
death happens, one will be able to control it in a nice way.

**Nyanamoli**: Yes, that’s what I meant with what I was describing
before. For people that are so used to just focusing on what’s in front
of them, they think if they just learn the art of focusing, regardless
of what the nature of the things they’re focusing on is, when death
comes in front of them, they’ll be able to attend it rightly. But
attention is not what’s in front of you. The roots of your attention are
from that periphery—which means if you haven’t addressed things on that
peripheral level, by the time they’re in front of you, it’s too late.
And you can see that while you’re still alive: because truly, if you
developed your focusing so far—if that were to work, focusing on that
one moment in front of you—after one session of that focusing, you would
be completely free from desire, from ill-will, from fear, from anything
unwholesome. But the fact that you’re not, means no amount of focusing
can help you with that. Only understanding that will then prevent it
from affecting you in the first place, can help you. Because that whole
idea of practicing focusing, so that when death comes you’ll know how to
deal with it—that whole idea is still rooted in that view of management.
Management, as in requiring to be affected and then learning how to
manage it. No, you want to uproot it whereby it doesn’t affect you in
the first place.

The only way to reach the deathless in this life is to really abandon
everything that is subjected to that death. And then you will know that
while you’re still alive. Because if you wait for death to confirm it to
you, it means you don’t know it—it means it won’t be the confirmation
you wanted to hear. That’s why an arahant already knows that death has
been abandoned and so on, even before he dies.

If you want to practice towards not being affected by the experience of
death when it comes, you start practicing towards not being affected by
any experience in this life, even now. So, ask yourself: “Am I affected
by the arisen enticement of sensuality, or ill-will, or distraction, or
carelessness? Yes, I’m affected by it. That’s my job, I shouldn’t be
affected by it—because if I’m not affected by that, I won’t be affected
by anything that comes through that same means of arising, even if it’s
death itself.” But people think “I’ll just do this focusing practice and
that’s magically going to result in me being in charge when death
comes.” Are you in charge now? Can you say ‘no’ to yourself when
sensuality presents itself? How many people can answer ‘yes’ to that
question? Not being affected in the first place, let alone having to
manage your restraint—yet here you are expecting to magically be able to
deal with death simply on account of some mechanical nostril-watching
practice. The only way you won’t be affected by death is if life itself
stops affecting you.

So, how do you practice not being affected by life? Well, you can only
do so while you’re still alive. You can only do so by discerning what
being affected is, by admitting it to yourself, by uncovering it, by
understanding it. Once you know what it is, you have a sense of what you
have to do in order to not be affected by it—by the experiences you have
in your life.

**Thaniyo**: Whatever context it arises in.

**Nyanamoli**: There’s always a context, yes. Always, internally,
there’s a context, which is why people spend most of their time covering
it up because it always reveals that which you don’t necessarily want to
see. Or rather, it takes time and effort to be able to get used to
seeing it and then not suffer on account of it. That’s why one’s life,
saṃsāra, and the entirety of sensuality goes with the grain—it’s
effortless to turn a blind eye, it’s effortless to engage with
sensuality. So, you need to start making the effort to pull yourself out
of it before you will be able to appreciate restraint, solitude,
non-distraction, non-ill-will. You won’t naturally value those things.
Effort and wisdom are required.

In meditation practice, allowing that context, concerning the context of
death, to endure, it means allowing a degree of fear to arise, and not
giving in to trying to get rid of it right away, but allowing it to be
there while the mind is thinking about other things. Don’t automatically
fear the unpleasant feeling, thinking “I must get rid of this, whatever
I do. I must get rid of this anxiety on account of the context of
death.” Why not? Because you don’t have to get rid of it. You’re the one
who chooses to do things on account of it. So, you realize you can
choose not to do anything on account of it—you can just allow it to be
there for as long as it wants to be. That’s how you automatically
strengthen your mind, automatically uncover anything you’ve been
covering up. It’s just going to take time because you’ve invested a lot
of time in covering it up. So, if the context of death is
enduring—you’re seated in your room, in your kuti, whether you are a
layperson or a monk, not distracted—you don’t even have to watch it,
just don’t rush into overly defining it, necessarily. That’s going to be
rooted in trying to get rid of that unpleasant aspect of it. Just allow
it to endure. And sometimes that endurance will be clearer, as in it’s
going to be more present. Sometimes it will be less, but you still
recognize it. And to a degree, it’s still there.

If there’s nothing else going on because there shouldn’t be—you’re in
that protected meditation environment, no distractions as I said—let it
endure. And then you have a thought: “After this, I must do this, this
or this,” and now you see that thought against that backdrop of the
context of death, as in things you must do, your duties are now seen
against the context of death. Or you have a memory of something that
happened in the past that bothers you, but now, against the context of
death, that memory has arisen, and you’re already not bothered as much
because you’ve got a bigger picture now. You’re not sucked into what
bothers you because you stopped trying to get rid of the unpleasant, and
now you have the ultimate unpleasant—the prospect of death. Any other
more inferior unpleasantness won’t be unpleasant. If those thoughts
present themselves, you let them present themselves. You don’t try to
get rid of them, or try to over-analyze them, overthink them—you just
make sure you don’t forget about the context of that certain death that
you’re concerned about right now in your meditation, while you let your
mind think what it wants to think.

And the point will come, if you keep doing it, when the context will be
immovable, imperturbable with regard to whatever your mind thinks. And
you will recognize also that the only way to disturb it is to
intentionally choose to do so by saying ‘yes’ to sensuality carelessly,
saying ‘yes’ to ill-will carelessly, saying ‘yes’ to distraction
carelessly. Also, when you say: “I’ll think about that later.” That’s
already a careless choice because you’re not thinking about that
context. That’s the point I’m making. You’re not thinking “I’m dead… I’m
going to be dead… I’m going to be dead.” It’s there enduring on its own.
You’re actually thinking about your duties, or things that bother you,
or things that you like. That’s what you’re thinking, but now on the
basis of the context that you have discerned. That context is there
peripherally as a container of all these things that you do, which means
there will be less and less ground, the longer that context endures, for
passion towards these particular things. And this is effortless as well
because you’re not thinking about it. All you need to do is abstain from
intentionally covering it up. And abstaining is effortless—it doesn’t
require you to do something. It just requires you to not do something.

That’s what meditation is, whatever your object of it might be.
Developing the same principle: the peripheral enduring context that
becomes imperturbable, as the Buddha would describe (in *samādhi*), in
regard to things that are inferior to it, things that are actually
presenting themselves. That’s why he said: “He establishes his mind in
the divine abiding of the *jhanā*s and—whether he sits, walks, urinates,
defecates, eats—his mind is established in that state,” because all
these things are inferior to his establishment.

**Thaniyo**: You don’t create death.

**Nyanamoli**: No, that’s the whole point. In the same sense, you don’t
create the Dhamma. Even the Buddha said it’s just an ancient path that
was covered and he uncovered it. He didn’t create anything—it’s just
discernment of these factual, universal truths. Therefore, that’s what
meditation should be revolving around—it doesn’t matter if you do it for
fifteen minutes or for five hours. Establish your mind upon the greater
context that is an infertile basis for any passion, any ill-will—that
cannot exist in that context. And then you let that context endure until
your mind gets established in it. And you know your mind is established
in it when you cannot be passionate, you cannot be affected by the
arisen feeling, pleasant, unpleasant or neutral. And then you also know,
when you’re about to do something, if it’s going to make you more firmly
established in that context, or it’s going to take you away from it. The
choice becomes much clearer: “This is unwholesome, this is wholesome.”
Unwholesome means it takes you away from the wholesome context.
Wholesome means it keeps you within the wholesome context.

**Thaniyo**: In line with the truth.

**Nyanamoli**: Yes, on the basis within that domain, doesn’t contradict
it, doesn’t abolish it, doesn’t drag you down from it. That’s why
Devadatta, once he started engaging in unwholesome acts, was unable to
establish his mind in jhanās. It wasn’t some magical energy that got
trapped or evaporated. It’s just that unwholesomeness contradicts the
domain of it.

If you choose to engage in it, you choose to then forsake this: the
greater context. And the only way to develop the greater context is to
keep discerning it, keep thinking about it, keep trying to establish it,
allowing it to endure. Not trying to get rid of it if it’s unpleasant.
That’s why you can’t crave for it either. You can’t crave for *jhanā*s.
You can’t crave for the imperturbable, wholesome *samādhi* because
craving is always toward the actual. Feeling in regard to the actual
thing, that’s what you crave for. But this is the context of it, and now
your mind is established in that, which means your mind then becomes
unreachable by any craving. Hence, no room for anything that’s based on
that craving—sensuality, ill-will, delusion, and distraction. So, if
people want to know how to make this context endure, you don’t do it,
you can’t make it endure—because that’s like you’re still trying to make
it actually in front of you. So, you make it endure by stopping trying
to make it endure. You make it endure by thinking about it, but by not
interfering with it either. In the same sense as the example we gave of
the appointment—the life-changing appointment you have—you don’t need to
make it endure. It’s already there. All you need to do is to stop
distracting yourself from it.

**Thaniyo**: You can’t cancel the appointment.

**Nyanamoli**: No. Well, you can’t cancel this appointment. So, you
realize the recognition of that is already a form of endurance, even if
you don’t necessarily feel fully concerned about it. Still, you are
aware of the context that whatever you do, it’s going to end, all of it.
It can end even before you realize it will end. Your beating heart right
now can stop. Allow that thought to endure—don’t overthink it, don’t
give in to fear of it—just allow it to endure. And then see other things
that appear in your mind against the endurance of that thought—because
you’re not looking for a specific answer of “This is how it is” or “This
is how it will be.” You’re looking for the evoking of the context of
being liable to death—that’s how you create that connection.

So, while I’m sitting here, secluded from unwholesomeness, secluded from
distraction, what if this beating muscle in my chest were to stop? Don’t
answer it, don’t provide an excuse or an explanation, just allow that
question to sink in. What if it were to stop? And then the mind will go
“This, this, this.” All that is secondary, still allow just the question
to endure. Then the thought comes, “It will stop.” Allow that to endure.
Then your timer rings, your meditation is finished. OK, fine, but you
realize that context still hasn’t changed. You go and do your duty now,
and you still have that context enduring, and you will forget it only
when you engage in unwholesomeness—lust, aversion or delusion.

That’s why you need to meditate in this manner as much as you can until
that context becomes imperturbable. You will also see that you need a
basis of sense restraint, physical restraint, as a guardian, whereby
your context is lost. And then your bodily behavior, speech, or mental
behavior doesn’t take you as far back into the unwholesomeness, and
therefore you won’t have to undo it as much. Hence, virtue comes first.
It’s necessary.

If the context is enduring—you still haven’t forgotten that your beating
heart might stop, that you’re fundamentally liable to death, you have a
degree of concern—you might think what do I do now? Well, you include
the thought of “What do I do now?” against that context, and you realize
you don’t do anything, you don’t need to do anything. Is the context
still there? Yes. Whatever might happen to me, would it be against the
backdrop of that context? Yes. Whatever I might do with my life, choose
immediately or for the future, is this context changeable? No. So, are
my engagements with life or with people worthy—against this context, in
this new light of the new context? Is it worth it to be so emotionally
disturbed by not getting what you want? Not really. If you’re in that
context, being affected by things such as sensuality and so on—if you’re
truly in that context, being affected by those things becomes
inconceivable, even at that very time. Sure, you can forget about the
context and then be affected by it, but when you’re in the context it is
truly imperturbable. All you need to do is find ways of maintaining the
context, regardless of whether you’re sitting in a protected meditation
environment or not. Hence seated, walking, lying down, extending your
arms, eating, urinating, defecating, whatever you do, you maintain the
context, day and night. To the extent necessary for obliterating any
ground for any passion to manifest again. All passion, not just the
things that you’re passionate towards. And that’s the meditation object
of death.
