---
archive_url: "https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20211222%20-%20247hh%20-%20Discerning%20the%20body%20for%20uprooting%20of%20sensuality.mp3"
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
category: Transcriptions
date: 2021-12-22
description: a summarized transcription
doc_url: "https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/145"
episode: 247
layout: post
title: Discerning The Body For Uprooting Of Sensuality
youtube_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7bU-4vX-daE"
---

a summarized transcription

by **Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero**

[\[video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7bU-4vX-daE) [\[audio\]](https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20211222%20-%20247hh%20-%20Discerning%20the%20body%20for%20uprooting%20of%20sensuality.mp3)

The reason why a person’s mind would still be dependent on the pleasure
of the senses despite knowing how little satisfaction they provide or
how much danger they entail, is fundamentally because they do not really
know where the problem is. You can know that the pleasures that you get
from the sense objects are not satisfactory but you still don’t
understand the extent of the sense objects, you don’t understand the
extent of the pleasure that you are chasing. In other words, when you
think about the dissatisfactory nature of the sense objects, that is not
entirely accurate because if it were, then you would understand the
danger and lose desire towards it. The problem with still being
attracted towards that which you know does not result in happiness but
instead in doing you more harm than good, the problem of you still being
addicted to the pleasures of the senses is that you don’t see where that
pleasure begins, you only see what you are used to seeing on the level
of the sense objects but there is more to that picture that is left out
because of which your addiction is not uprooted, and that which is left
out is the relationship with you and your body.

When there is a sensual pull towards sense objects for pleasure, at the
same time, your body and senses are there peripherally enduring as a
basis from which you are pressured. The relationship, on that peripheral
level, between you and that body that is pressuring you towards sense
objects, that’s what needs to be understood. The reason why that is so
hard to understand is because the body as a unity of sense organs does
not and cannot appear on the level of sense objects. Your dependence on
the pleasures of the sense objects is determined by and dependent upon
the pressure that your body exerts on your mind. It is a wild animal
that you are tied to, it’s inseparable from your mind, and it wants to
go left and right and eat this and that, and it will pressure you until
it gets what it wants.

It’s not about removing the agreeable and enticing things from the world
to be free, it’s about taming that which pressures you because of which
you are not free. That’s why you are still attracted to sense objects
despite knowing how little satisfaction sense objects provide. Your
knowledge that “This is dissatisfactory” is limited and pertains only
within the sense objects and you are failing to see the bigger picture
of this whole underlying pressure of your own body and the pleasure that
you depend on. You are failing to see the wild animal underneath. You
don’t see that as a problem, you only think that the sense objects that
you become obsessed about, are the problem. No, that’s pretty much the
end result of the problem already being there and fully controlling you.
That’s why sense restraint - not engaging in these sense objects that
are inciting of lust, etc, is the prerequisite which will help you to
see the roots of the problem, which is the body, the senses, that are
attracted to the pleasure that they are used to, to those unwholesome
pleasures that you have been carelessly feeding them.

If you don’t engage with the pleasures that they are used to, their
dependence on that will cease because they haven’t been engaging with
it. If the animal is engaged in a perpetual wild behaviour it will
become used to that and that’s going to be its norm, but if the animal
is not allowed to engage with these sense objects which are provocative
of lust and aversion, it will calm down whether it wants to or not
because things of the agitating nature are now things that the animal
has not been engaging with. If you want to uproot the dependence on the
pleasure of the sense objects, you have to uproot the dependence on the
pleasure of this body, its agreeability, your assumption of ownership,
and not seeing it peripherally as a thing which endures there on its
own, with its own thirsts.

You need to disown the body but that can only be done on the level of
that correct peripheral recognition of what the body is. It cannot be
done on the level of observing the body with your senses because you are
not observing the body, you are observing the sense objects which
require the body, and even if you are super attentive to every sensation
that occurs, that’s all on the level of sense objects and that’s why
none of that which is underneath it, which is that necessary requirement
for perceiving the sense object, none of that will be affected by that
practise and by those efforts. In the same sense that an eye cannot see
itself, for as long as you believe that you can, you will be engaged in
an extremely futile attempt of trying to access that which is
inaccessible, i.e. trying to access your sense organs on the level of
sense objects, which is a contradiction in terms. You need to
see/discern the body on the level of the senses, on the level of the
framework of the world of the sense objects, and that will fully purify
the relationship between you and the body that appears peripherally
while you are experiencing sense objects.

For as long as you have sense objects, the body, the unity of the sense
organs, is peripheral to that. It’s always the background to the domain
of the sense objects and that’s where you need to discern it. It’s not
about examining the individual organs and looking at it with other sense
organs, it’s about understanding the six sense base, the body as that
thing which is there that needs to be tamed on that level of the
peripheral. Through not engaging with sense objects that are pulling
you, that pressure that the body exerts over you will diminish and the
clearer you will see it on that level which is revealed through sense
restraint. The more you get used to it, the less pressure there will be,
the body will be seen correctly and any possibility of pleasure to be
accessed or experienced through that body will not be something that
will interest your mind, because the mind would see the extent of the
danger if it chooses to go in that direction.

So just to summarise, the first thing you want to do is, if you want to
stop chasing the sense pleasures, you start practising mindfulness of
the body correctly, not as an observational technique of watching
sensations, but by seeing it peripherally as an enduring bag of skin
which contains the sense organs that are attracted to the various sense
pleasures, that they get in their respective domains. You want to learn
to discern the body as it is, as a thing in the world on the level of
the peripheral, without trying to attend to it directly, which is
impossible. You will get to see that body peripherally, if you have been
practising sense restraint sufficiently, guarding of the sense doors,
being moderate in eating, watchful and dwelling in solitude - because
company and the world requires your mind to be on the level of sense
objects, and if you have not been sufficiently withdrawn from that, then
there is not enough space for you to step back and get to see this body
as a thing that endures there in the world as a basis for all the sense
object experiences. You will not be able to see the relationship between
the two.

Now when you have been sufficiently withdrawn in this way, you can then
disown the pressure and pull of those individual organs, you can see
them as five individual animals, like the simile that the Buddha gave.
You can see them as wild animals that need training. People who are not
withdrawn from the sense objects, see ‘the animals’ only in abstraction,
which means that they do not see them. They don’t see their sense organ
as an independent entity which pretty much has its own life,
desires/needs, that they need to tame and control. So each time there is
a pull from a sense object, then they are the ones that are pulled by
sense objects, they don’t see anything in between because those sense
organs, those animals, do not appear on the level of sense objects that
you are so used to looking at and measuring your existence by. That’s
why there is the encouragement for the practice of sense restraint and
correct mindfulness, for discerning those peripheral signs and features
of that body which exist on the level of ‘around that which you are
attending to’, that’s what the body is.

That’s also what the Buddha meant when speaking about knowing the [body
to the extent necessary for final
knowledge](https://suttacentral.net/mn10). The measure of that extent is
how familiar you are with the phenomenon of the body on the level of the
peripheral, how steady your mind is in discerning the presence of the
body for what it is on its own without trying to attend to it directly,
without trying to make it a sense object. If you can discern that extent
sufficiently then you will no longer be underlied by lust, craving and
thirst of the individual senses.

By not discerning the senses and by being on the level of sense objects
that’s how you are underlined by all the asavas. They underlie you
because you go over them, and then they direct and push you. So you want
to develop your mind to the extent necessary where you are not
[underlied by them](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.56), but when you
underlie them, so to speak. Like in one sutta where it says that the
arahants mind is not overwhelmed by things, by pressures, he is the one
who [overwhelms them](https://suttacentral.net/sn35.243). That is what
is meant by establishing the right order, seeing what comes first,
seeing the body on the level of the peripheral, as that which is first
and not losing that context, despite what happens with your individual
attention. So whatever you are attending to, whatever pressure there is,
desire for pleasure and so on, the order that is now determined by your
knowledge, now does not change, you still see that peripheral body as
the basis for all of this that is happening, and all you need to do is
protect that order so that there is no room to become underlied by lust,
aversion, distraction, which is the perverted order.

Practice that sufficiently and lust, aversion, distraction will
completely fade because they have not been maintained through the
perversion of the order. That’s why Ven. Ananda said that “Sensuality is
a perversion of perception”, i.e. putting the sense objects first and
everything else measured through that as second, and not seeing the body
peripherally, the necessary basis for sense organs as that which is
first, structurally speaking. If you un-pervert that perception there is
then no room for lust to breed and expand

<div lang="en">

> “…I’ve got a burning desire for pleasure; My mind is on fire! Please,
> out of compassion, Gotama, tell me how to quench the flames?”
>
> “Your mind is on fire because of a perversion of perception. Turn away
> from the feature of things that’s attractive, provoking lust. See all
> sankharas as other/foreign, as suffering and not-self. Extinguish the
> great fire of lust, don’t burn up again and again. With a mind unified
> and serene, reflect on the unattractive aspects of the body. With
> recollection of the body, be full of disenchantment. Contemplate the
> signless, give up the underlying tendency to conceit; and when you
> comprehend conceit, you will live at peace.”
>
> — <cite>[SN 8.4](https://suttacentral.net/sn8.4)</cite>

</div>
