---
title: Summarized Transcriptions 151-200
author: BBBalls
date: 2022-06-26
category: Transcriptions
layout: post
---

## 155hh- You Don't Need To Say No To Everything

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200516 - 155hh - You dont need to say no to everything.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/84){:target="blank"}

***

**Nm:** What needs to be restrained? Do you say no to everything, to
whatever your eye wants to see or whatever your nose wants to smell? How
would you know what to say no to?

**Q:** Depends on my motivations.

**Nm:** So what would be the motivation for restraint?

**Q:** Wanting pleasure and not wanting pain.

**Nm:** Well, you always want pleasure, you always don\'t want pain.
That\'s the implicit starting point. Whatever you do it\'s done for the
sake of pleasure, and you trying to say no to every desire, to
everything, will also be done for the sake of pleasure. So you\'ll be
denying everything for the same reason, and therefore it won\'t free you
from the problem.

The sole purpose of restraint is to develop context regarding your
motivations. You have to understand that you wanting to practice
restraint is rooted in the same desire, that\'s what the Buddha meant
when he said desire is to be abandoned by the means of desire, but not
simply that desire can be abandoned through the desire, or that just by
craving, you will abandon craving, No, you crave for freedom from
craving initially, but if you start looking at the context of your
motivation, where things are rooted, what type of intention is behind
what you want to do, what you\'ve done or what you\'re planning to do,
that\'s then how you make craving redundant. By avoiding doing things
that perpetuate craving, because not all things perpetuate craving. Not
all things perpetuate ignorance. Things that are rooted in lust,
aversion, and distraction perpetuate craving and ignorance.

Lust, aversion, and distraction are not IN things that you are doing.
They are in your motivations that make you act for those reasons. And
that\'s what the Buddha said :

> "Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> Not the various things in the world;\
> Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> The various things just stand there in the world;\
> But the wise get rid of desire therein." 

> -- AN 6.63

If you want to uproot lust, aversion and delusion, it\'s not simply by
doing this and abstaining from that, it\'s by knowing your intentions
behind your actions and refraining from acting out of the unwholesome.
But for that to be discerned you need to first restrain your habitual
action towards the beautiful/wanted, habitual action away from the
ugly/unwanted, habitual action from distracting yourself from boredom,
but not for its own sake, only for the sake to see how lust, aversion,
delusion are actually on the level of your intentions, your choices, and
not in the senses or sense objects.

That\'s also how 'virtue and duty' is a fetter, it\'s you assuming lust,
aversion, delusion to be in these things that you\'re now abstaining
from, and by abstaining from it, you think that\'s all you need to do.
If you think that your mission is accomplished, by abstaining from bad
things, you will not look for where the badness of bad things is rooted.
Which is in your intentions.

So when we talk about sense restraint, you take on the precepts, and
then within that, you see what the mind presents you with. If you say, I
will not do anything because everything is rooted in desire, that will
be rooted in desire. That\'s your desire. If you say, I will stop
thinking, that is your thought. So you can\'t just decide to step
outside of the problem. You are made up of the problem, your existence
is the problem.

So you take on the precepts, you take on sense restraint, on the level
of faith first, and now you go throughout your day, having to do things
and you can\'t stop doing and you shouldn\'t stop doing. You just want
to know where your motivation is rooted and if you wonder, how far to go
with that? Well, you go within the precepts. If things that are
presented to you to be done, would be breaking the precepts, you just
say no to that. You don\'t need to overthink that side of things. But if
it\'s within the precepts, doesn\'t mean \"Oh, I can do it justifiably
because it\'s not breaking the precepts\", nor is it \"I must deny
everything, because everything is rooted in desire\". No, the same thing
today can be rooted in one motivation, but tomorrow it can be rooted in
another motivation. But if all you see is the thing that you either
always say yes or no to, you\'re never going to see your motivation,
which is where the whole problem has always been. The lust, aversion,
delusion can never step outside of the domain of your intention and
enter these things in the world. It always remains within your
intention.

First, you need to recognize your intention, your motivation, then the
more effort you make towards discerning it, the clearer the discernment
will become.

You might say \" The problem is in the desire towards this and that. So
I\'ll say no to that, but now I have a desire to say no to everything.
So I\'ll say no to that\". So you just start saying no to more and more
things and wind yourself up completely and equally have no perspective
in as much as if you were engaging with sensuality. That\'s like the
ignoble way of that self-mortification and denial of everything.

You have the precepts and within that, you question things, for example:
\"I want to go for a walk. Why? Oh, because I\'m restless. Okay, yeah,
that\'s not the perfect motivation but is it a sensual motivation? Is it
because I\'m hoping to experience a sight, sound, smell, taste, touch,
that will excite me? No, not specifically just because it\'s too hot
under this roof and I want some breeze. Okay, that\'s alright. I\'m not
sure how ideal it is or not, but I know that it\'s not as bad as
sensuality or as breaking the precepts\". So you do it. You go for a
walk because you want some breeze, you want some comfort. But then next
time that you want to go for a walk, you re-evaluate. You don\'t just do
it again because you\'ve done it before. So is it still rooted in
comfort? Yes. Is it still not rooted in sensuality? Yes. But can you
perhaps endure the discomfort and not go for a walk? You always want to
see where your motivation is rooted. Like, why do I want the breeze and
the comfort? Because I\'m sleepy, and I\'ll fall asleep, but if I go for
a walk, I\'ll be awake and then I can spend more time diligently
practicing. If that\'s the reason, then you don\'t need to fear doing
it.

You need to maintain perspective on your intent, and you will get to
know that perspective by keeping the precepts and practicing sense
restraint, by creating the boundary within which you can discern when
your mind moves towards or over the boundary of the precepts. That\'s
also why the Buddha never allowed ascetic practices like living at the
root of a tree and so on, as mandatory because, for some, such actions
might be rooted in the unwholesome.

**Discern your intent behind your current situation, and say no to the
unwholesome.**

When you start doing this it will seem restrictive but when you get used
to it, you will see that a whole space opens up whereby you can do many
things which do not partake in or maintain the unwholesome. And by no
longer maintaining unwholesome intentions through acting out of them,
they will have to diminish and eventually cease.

Agreeable or disagreeable things do not cause your suffering, it\'s your
intent which is the cause. Knowing your intent while keeping the
precepts, that\'s how your mind will develop rightly, and if you get
confused about your intent just step back and question what your intent
is in trying to not be confused and in doubt, which will then reveal
your intent. Sometimes it is difficult to find your intent but it is
always right there, it\'s the basis for anything you are about to do or
are doing.

**The clearer the perspective you have on the mind, the easier it will
be to not act on unwholesome intentions.**

People act habitually, addictively because there is no perspective on
their situation. Once the perspective is increased through one\'s effort
then what constitutes sense restraint is self-evident. You only restrain
things that are rooted in the unwholesome, you don\'t restrain
everything because that\'s like starving yourself to death. Initially
and more often than not, you might need to be restraining more than
usual, to be on a safer side. That\'s why the Buddha would always lean
on the side of asceticism\*, even if in itself it does not necessarily
result in wisdom. Just don\'t become neurotic and say no to everything.
Because that means that you\'ll lose context and won\'t be aware of your
intent.

\* [MN 3 - Dhammadayada sutta](https://suttacentral.net/mn3):

> "\...Now, monks, suppose that I had eaten, refused more food, had my
> fill, finished, had enough, had what I needed, and some alms-food was
> left over to be thrown away. Then two monks arrived hungry and weak,
> and I told them: 'Monks, I have eaten and have had all I needed, but
> there is this alms-food of mine left over to be thrown away. Eat it if
> you like; if you do not eat it then I shall throw it away where there
> is no greenery or drop it into the water where there is no life.' Then
> one monk thought: 'the Blessed One has eaten and had what he needed,
> but there is this alms-food of the Blessed One left over to be thrown
> away; if we do not eat it the Blessed One will throw it away, but this
> has been said by the Blessed One: 'Monks, be my heirs in Dhamma, not
> my heirs in material things.' Now this alms-food is one of the
> material things. Suppose that instead of eating this alms-food I pass
> the night and day hungry and weak.' And instead of eating that
> alms-food, he passed that night and day hungry and weak. Then the
> second monk thought: 'the Blessed One has eaten and he has had all
> that he required, but there is this alms-food of the Blessed One left
> over to be thrown away. Suppose that I eat this alms-food and pass the
> night and day neither hungry nor weak.' And after eating that
> alms-food he passed the night and day neither hungry nor weak. Now
> although that monk by eating that alms-food passed the night and day
> neither hungry nor weak, yet the first monk is more to be respected
> and commended by me. Why, because the willpower that he has
> demonstrated shall contribute to the fewness of his wishes,
> contentment, effacement, easy support, and arousal of energy.
> Therefore, monks, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material
> things."

## 168hh- The Contradiction in the Unwholesome

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200804 - 168hh - Looking for a bigger picture importance of precepts.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/88){:target="blank"}

***

**Nm:** Unwholesome things are unwholesome because in themselves they
contain a contradiction or a discrepancy.

### Killing

**Q:** You can see the same thread of contradiction running through
every unwholesome action. Take killing, for example, one takes away the
life of another which does not belong to you.

**Nm:** It\'s a contradiction. You\'re destroying something that\'s not
yours as if it were yours. Also, life is implicitly valuable for
everyone, even for people who don\'t necessarily have a view that life
is worth living. Still, they can only do that based on being alive. That
means that life in itself is taken at its face value, and it has value.
So, you as the one who implicitly values life, destroying the life of
another, that\'s another discrepancy of the values i.e while you value
life you are now acting towards destroying life intentionally.

**Q:** You are trying to conceal that fundamental value.

**Nm:** Not explicitly. No, that\'s implied in it. You might not even
completely think about it at all. You\'re not intentionally trying to
conceal it.

**Q:** We are then born into that kind of concealment, we are born not
knowing wholesome and unwholesome.

**Nm:** You\'re not born with fully developed concealments. But as the
Buddha said, all the underlying tendencies for those concealments are
present in a newborn. So they will grow and develop.

**Q:** The ignorance that we start with, it\'s not something that we
decided to do.

**Nm:** Basically ignorance is part of the way you attend to things.
It\'s implicit in it. You know, when you attend to something, you
automatically have to ignore something else, you cannot attend to
everything. That\'s the principle of avijja, in other words, by looking
this way, you will not be able to look at the other way simultaneously.
So which is the most common way that people choose to look? Well, it\'s
the way of least resistance. It\'s the way of sensuality. It\'s the way
of ill will, it\'s the way of passion, desire, satisfaction. So it\'s
the way of \"with the grain\", \"with the flow\". Simply attending to
that \"way\" means you\'re not attending the other way. You cannot
attend both at the same time. You have to find a good reason to start
looking \"upstream\" and then start swimming upstream, while everything
is trying to pull you downstream.

**Q:** Can you say that, that which is unwholesome is that which goes
against the way things are?

**Nm:** Yes, but I don\'t like using the term \"the way things are\"
because that has been overused and is quite mystified already. It would
be better to say that \"it goes against the universal principles\" i.e
the Dhamma. And you need to understand the Dhamma to know what those
universal principles are. You can have an idea of what nature\'s law is
and then infer from there what is wholesome, but that\'s on the level of
an abstract view, which can correspond to the practical application to
some extent. Some people can have an accurate abstract view but haven\'t
truly understood the nature of wholesome as wholesome.

### Stealing 
**Q:** If we can just go to the next precept, which is to refrain from
\"taking that which is not given\". How is stealing unwholesome?

**Nm:** First of all, you can see that you cannot accidentally break the
precepts. The perception is the fundamental factor. If you perceive that
something is truly yours, and you take it because you perceive it as
yours but it happens not to belong to you, it\'s just a mistake,
there\'s no stealing involved. Stealing requires your intentional effort
to override the truth, which is what the discrepancy is. So intentional
effort to override the value of life, which is implicit, even if you
don\'t think about it, or intentional effort to override the value of
ownership, which is implicit, but you choose to ignore it. That\'s why
these things are unwholesome. If you choose to act with intention of ill
will, desire, carelessness, means you\'re accepting that contradicting
value.

### Sexual Misconduct 

**Q:** The next precept of refraining from sexual misconduct or having
sexual relations with people you shouldn\'t e.g another\'s wife or
underage persons etc, is again misappropriating things that do not
belong to you.

**Nm:** You perceive it as not yours, as something that shouldn\'t be
engaged with, and then you choose to give priority to your desire and
ignore the factual basis of your perception. And why is passion or
desire a contradiction? Why is that desire, a contradiction on the
existential level? What is the discrepancy there? Desire is always
towards sense objects. Whatever you desire, it\'s going to be one of
these six sense objects. Can you have any of those six sense objects
without the senses being there, without the mind being there, can you
have sights without the eye? So what is the nature of the senses?

**Q:** They\'re not mine.

**Nm:** How can you then cultivate the desire for that which you can
only get on account of things that are not yours. The only way you can
cultivate desire towards those sense objects is to take these senses to
be yours, to begin with. So you can\'t have a desire towards sense
objects without implicitly taking up the ownership of the senses. Taking
up what\'s not yours, starts on the level of welcoming desire. Desire
arises and by welcoming it, you take up desire and every value that that
desire implies. The value is that senses belong to you, that they are in
your control, enjoyable, and not dangerous.

**Q:** You\'re acting from a premise that these senses are mine, safe,
secure, and delightful.3

**Nm:** That\'s all implicit. You can\'t ask for the desire to not
manifest itself. You have no say in that. But you have a say in your
ATTITUDE towards the manifestation of desire or ill will. Are you
welcoming it, delighting in it? Are you rejoicing in the prospect of
fulfilling that desire? Even if you practice sense restraint, are you
still entertaining the phenomenon of desire in your experience when
desire manifests? And if you do, that\'s why you\'re still contradicting
yourself on the existential basis because you cannot possibly entertain
the value of desire without implicitly taking up the ownership of the
sense bases. If you stop valuing the sense objects, stop entertaining
desire towards them, you get to uproot the taking up(assumption) the
sense organs as yours.

**Q:** Basically, you have a desire towards sense objects because
you\'ve misappropriated the senses.

**Nm:** Yes, it\'s like a vicious circle. Because you appropriate the
senses, as in you don\'t question your ownership of them, that\'s how
you cultivate desire towards the sense objects. Because you cultivate
desire towards sense objects, that\'s how you appropriate the sense
organs. So one feeds the other. Therefore, first, you need to start
restraining your behavior on account of the desire towards senses
objects, as in you need to start keeping the precepts. And then once
that becomes your norm of behavior, then you can get to see that on the
mental level, you should now stop delighting in it, welcoming it,
flirting with it, even if you know you\'re not going to act physically.
And then eventually, you will dry out from that wetness of desire, and
then you get to see the true nature of those senses which is perilous.

However, you can\'t just say okay, I\'m not regarding my senses as mine
anymore. Because that thought of your senses is a sense object. You
cannot directly experience your sense organs, which is why they always
have implicit ownership that you need to undo indirectly. You can\'t
just decide to let go of them, because you\'re not holding it
intentionally. So, what is the thing that if you let go of will result
in you not having ownership of the sense organs? It\'s the desire
towards sense objects. Letting go of that, you\'re a step closer to
letting go of the sense organs which you cannot perceive, and if you
think you can, that is because you are conceiving them, which is not
what they are.

You get trapped by sense organs because you pick up the bait of the
sense objects. Your desire is you picking up the bait and thus getting
trapped. Therefore, to no longer be trapped, you must simply no longer
pick up the bait, and then INDIRECTLY you will no longer be
appropriating the sense organs as yours. (You cannot directly let go of
sense organs.)

### Lying 

**Q:** The next precept is refraining from misrepresenting the truth.

**Nm:** The fundamental lie is avijja. Would you be able to be
complacent, lazy, dull and careless, if you were placed in a dangerous
situation that you perceive as dangerous? It would be inconceivable for
you to relax on that level, to completely just let your mind melt away
and forget about itself. And yet here you are in the most perilous
situation you can be in, being subject to death, sickness, aging. And
yet you are completely complacent. It\'s the fundamental contradiction,
the hardest one to undo. Because it\'s not as obvious as desire or ill
will.

For example, if you want to do a little experiment, if you\'re not sure
if your existence in itself is dangerous, just lock yourself in a room,
a comfortable room But don\'t engage with any distraction for a day,
switch your phone off, switch everything off, don\'t talk, and don\'t
step outside. Just sit alone on a chair or a bed and stare at the wall.
And let\'s see how long you can do that before you start freaking out on
account of that boredom. So if boredom is not truly dangerous. Why are
you afraid of it? Why do you constantly need something to keep yourself
engaged, to swim so that you don\'t sink? Why are you terrified of
solitude and loneliness? Just think, if you get sick and can\'t move,
can\'t distract yourself with all these things and projects. How will
your mind remain? Will it be unaffected by that or will you start
completely losing it? So let the boredom endure. And it\'s going to turn
into full-blown anxiety and dread, and why is that if existence is not
dangerous and perilous, where does this anxiety come from? Because you
haven\'t done anything by the way. You\'re in a perfectly safe
environment. Locked, nobody can get in, safe as you can be. And yet here
you are freaking out internally. Because that\'s what your existence is,
it\'s all these efforts and actions you do, to enable yourself to ignore
that very nature.

Imagine somebody comes and tells you that you have ten minutes to live.
Would you continue laughing carelessly, watching movies, or playing
games? It will be impossible for you to do that. Because suddenly the
sense of urgency is back, and the only reason a sense of urgency can be
restored is because it\'s always there implicitly. That thread of
anxiety that you can never completely cover-up is for everyone what
human existence is. Only the *Arahant* is completely free from it.

When you are young, healthy, and have all the senses working, it feels
like there\'s no problem. As I said, just do a little experiment, close
yourself in a room for half a day and see what will happen to your mind
when there are no distractions available. And if your mind was
problem-free beforehand, this will not cause any issues, yet it does.
Solitude starts revealing the main motivation for all your various
engagements, which is to cover up your underlying anxiety on account of
your fundamentally uncertain existence.

### Intoxication 

**Q:** The fifth precept, refraining from intoxicants, is unwholesome
because it\'s the basis for carelessness, it\'s the covering up of any
mental clarity that one has.

**Nm:** Yes, can you possibly engage with intoxicating substances
without implicitly endorsing complacency and dullness of your mind?
Inconceivable. I don\'t necessarily mean getting drunk, I mean that
simply by engaging with that substance, to whatever extent, you are
increasing dullness of mind, which always results in increased
heedlessness. Dullness means loss of context, loss of perspective, even
if you\'re not drunk, it\'s still the direction of losing context and
perspective, even if it\'s half a step.

Can you engage with the absolute minimum level of intoxication, without
valuing it, without delighting in the prospect of the dullness of the
mind, preferring the pleasure of numb distraction? Can you be engaging
with that direction of intoxication if you see it as dangerous? Can you
put one foot inside the lion\'s den, when there\'s a chance that the
lion is right there by the entrance? You wouldn\'t flirt with that idea
at all. A little bit of poison is still poison. It doesn\'t affect you
like a lot of poison would, but it\'s still a poison which affects you,
which means that it might be enough to kill you.

Remember you\'re already full of wrong views concerning everything, in
regards to desire, in regards to ill will. For all of that to be undone
there is a lot of work to do, and yet here you are flirting with the
things that directly result in increasing those wrong views. So yes,
literally a glass of wine might be enough to fully cement you in the
wrong view that sensuality is not bad. And because of that, you will not
get the right view and you will remain bound to samsara, for eons to
come. Is the glass of wine worth that risk? Do you really know there is
no risk?

**Q:** When you are intoxicated with life, health, and youth, you don\'t
consider the inherent risk.

**Nm:** Yes, you don\'t consider the context, which is that you might be
healthy, alive, and young now, but can you guarantee that there will be
the next breath? No, you have no guarantee of that. When you fall away
from recognizing that context, you go into the direction of desire
towards sense objects, towards intoxication with the world. You cannot
have both, you cannot be absorbed in/ intoxicated with the world while
maintaining a clear, dispassionate, mindful perspective. Thinking that
you can is the result of your intoxication with the sensual world.
Thinking that you are seeing clearly while you are intoxicated is a
contradiction.

## 169hh- The Context Of Your Suffering

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200811 - 169hh - Context of your suffering.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/79){:target="blank"}

***

MN 121:

> \"His mind enters into that perception of forest and acquires
> confidence, steadiness, and inclines towards it. He understands thus:
> \'Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of
> village, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there might
> be dependent on the perception of people, those are not present here.
> There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the
> singleness dependent on the perception of forest.\' He understands:
> \'This field of perception is empty of the perception of village; this
> field of perception is empty of the perception of people. There is
> present only this non-emptiness, namely, the singleness dependent on
> the perception of forest.\' Thus he regards it as empty of what is not
> there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is
> present thus: \'This is present.\' Thus, Ananda, this is his genuine,
> unperverted, pure, emptiness.\"

You can use the perceptions of the forest to establish your mind so that
you\'re not bothered by anything in the village. It\'s not the actual
perceiving of the forest or staring at a forest and repeating to
yourself that it\'s a forest, which is usually the popular way of doing
meditation. It\'s quite the opposite. It\'s about being able to
establish the perception of the forest when you\'re not in the forest.
That\'s how it\'s done rightly. Which means it\'s not an actual
perceiving on the level of your five senses, it\'s on the level of the
mind, which you discerned and became familiar with, while you were in
the forest.

Your mind is then established upon a context (peripheral awareness), of
the circumstances and environment which provides a basis for more
particular action. So even though you might be in the village, if your
mind refuses to abandon the context of the greater forest, your time in
the village, is only going to be minimal because your mind inclines
towards the context which it has developed, which happens to be the
forest.

If you develop the context of the forest, no particular sight, sound,
smell, taste, touches from the village will be able to affect you,
because the mind still perceives itself based on the context of the
forest. But if you get careless and forget about protecting the greater
context, you will start giving into particular sight, sound, smell,
taste, touches in the village, you will drop off from the context of the
forest and your senses will pull you all over the place. So, once you
are established upon the greater context of the forest, all you need to
do is guard your senses on a particular basis as in, just don\'t
intentionally go with the unwholesome, and the context of the forest
will be maintained.

If you understand this principle, you can go even further, for example,
what\'s an even greater context than the context of the forest? When you
look higher, you can find or uncover (not create) the context of the
earth, planet earth, element of earth, call it whichever you want,
whether you\'re in the forest, whether you\'re in the town, you are on
earth. But as I said, to truly start developing the context of the
earth, you will need serious renunciation concerning particular things
in your environment. How can you develop or transcend a greater context,
when you still refuse to let go of the lesser? If you develop a mind
upon the context of/sign of earth, it would result in you not even
regarding your own body as belonging to you. And that\'s why the Buddha
encouraged it. Contemplating the four elements will result in dispassion
towards this particular manifestation of material form which is within
the greater context of earth.

Whenever you look at this body, it\'s made of the same elements that
everything else in the world is composed of, which means, all of that is
inferior to the great basis of the context of earth that provides these
elements. So I\'m saying this because sometimes people can think that
simply by thinking about the great earth, they\'re developing the
context, but you will know you\'re developing the context, when concern
for your own life and body, senses failing, sickness and so on,
disappears. In that sense, you could see how the context determines the
extent of your perception. The extent to which the perception of the
earth is developed defines everything particular that comes your way as
to whether you\'re going to be affected by it or not.

You can continue to develop even more refined perceptions than the
earth, such as water, fire, air, the four colors, the infinite space and
consciousness which is the most refined of them all, because it\'s the
context of simple presence, whether it\'s suffering that\'s present,
happiness, perception of the village, etc, all have in common,
'presence', it has arisen.

But you don\'t have to develop (discern clearly) all these different
extents/contexts, the extent of earth can be enough for final
liberation. Because to properly develop the context of the earth, you
will have to abandon everything inferior to it, such as any sense of
ownership concerning this particular insignificant little body. You can
see how all these great mountains here are already greater than your
body. They\'re going to be here longer than you. They\'ve been here
longer than you ever will be. Yet, it\'s through not seeing that
context, not allowing it to endure, not knowing how to maintain it in
the background of your mind, why you get pulled with particular senses,
perverting the whole picture, whereby you are the center, you are the
context.

For an unenlightened mind, the five modes of being or the contexts of
the five hindrances, determine the particular actions. Would you be able
to engage with sensuality, if the context of sensuality is not pushing
you that way? If you haven\'t given in to the pressure of the context of
sensuality, would you be deciding the particular acts towards
sensuality? No. But then at the same time, if you were not doing the
particular acts of sensuality, would that context be maintained? No,
because it needs maintenance. You need to be engaging in sensuality to
maintain sensuality. That\'s why sense restraint has to come first. You
stop maintaining it so that you can discern the general Nature of things
which are general perceptions that you can use to abandon inferior ones,
and they don\'t require your doing. 'The Nature of things' does not
require you for it's maintenance, unlike the hindrances.

What is the Nature of things? It\'s the context of things. And the
Dhamma is the universal context. And what\'s the most universal about
anything? It\'s that it has arisen on its own, that it cannot provide
that lasting satisfaction of ownership and because of that, it cannot be
owned. Anicca, dukkha, anatta are universal contexts. The highest
context is, 'I can\'t own anything even if I want to'. And that context
can become your mode of being through the clarity of comprehension you
developed regarding it. Nothing particular then will be able to sway you
or disturb you. Because you don\'t even own this body, let alone
anything that can come through the senses.

So, for example, if you truly understood the fundamental context of
anicca, regarding everything that has a nature to manifest that\'s
*sotapatti*, which is the understanding that "whatever has the context
of arising, because of that, has the context of cessation", and the
context of non-ownership, non-appropriation, indifference, dispassion,
all these other contexts come from that realized/developed fundamental
context of anicca.

How can you discern/develop/realize such a context? The only method is
learning what the context is and then making an effort to discern it.

## 170hh- How to Develop Solitude

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200818 - 170hh - QA - How to develop the attitude of solitude.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/30){:target="blank"}

***

**Q:**​ The Buddha encourages the development of seclusion. What then is
the best way to cultivate it?

**Nm:**​ You need to start exposing yourself to seclusion because
you\'re not going to prepare yourself for seclusion if you never spend
time alone, or if you\'re always socialising. Being ready for seclusion
cannot come out of that because it\'s completely the opposite. So as
helpful as people can be, for one\'s well being. Needing others is a
compromise. Whether you\'re a layperson or a monk doesn\'t matter. But
when I say needing others is a compromise, I\'m speaking specifically
about needing others for your existential well being. That\'s a massive
compromise and a huge risk if you never grow out of it.

We are all owners of our actions, nobody else is responsible for your
actions. What you do stays with you. No other person can help you with
that or take away from your burden or add to it. It\'s always on you,
your intentions, your decisions, your actions will always stay in you.
You are bound with your actions and the subsequent results. So,
existentially, you\'re alone whether you want to be or not. And the
recognition of that existential principle is where the practice starts.
The experience is always me and others. Even if others are your closest
friends, partners or relatives, it\'s still others. You can have very
close others but for you, it\'s still just you. And when it comes to
your feelings, your intentions, your responsibilities, they cannot be
shared among the group.

**Q:**​ I can tell you how I feel but I cannot give you my experience of
feeling.

**Nm:**​ Yes, the dimension of your feeling is inherently inaccessible
to me. In as much as my feeling is inherently accessible to anybody
other than me. As I mentioned before, solitude is not optional,
existence is not optional. Existence is solitary and that\'s why if
somebody wants to overcome and undo ​*Bhava*​- the existence, you need
to start recognizing the inherent principles of it. So for as long as
you don\'t leave the group, how can you develop solitude? How can you
see through it? How can you discern that neutral feeling that the Buddha
praises, for which solitude is required?

Most people who are not used to solitude, when they are left alone,
boredom is the first result. Which is a lot more problematic than one
might initially think because if you stay with your boredom, it starts
turning into a restless panic, fear, anxiety. And that\'s when you
realize how much you actually depend on your perception of others around
you. How much you depend on that in order to conceal that inherent
nature of your existence, that you are alone and fundamentally, that
you\'re not in control. That\'s why most people are so terrified of
boredom, because their whole existence, their whole lifestyle goes
against that nature of existence, that you are not in your control, that
you are alone. So that\'s why every little reminder of that is
frightening for people who are not used to it.

Of course, you can\'t expect to just jump into solitude overnight,
because you could legitimately lose your mind but at the same time, to
use that as an excuse to never do it and never prepare yourself for it.
Well, that\'s equally ignorant. So you want to recognize \"Okay, I\'m
not ready to jump into that extreme solitude right away. Which means I
should make myself ready because what do I think death is? Is it any
different from cessation or cancellation of all my means of escape from
myself, cancellation of sensuality, cancellation of company,
cancellation of all my distractions?!\". That\'s why death is the
ultimate terror for an ordinary person (*putthujana*)​ who is
fundamentally, existentially dependent upon others, upon sensuality,
upon distraction.

Some people use examples of others who jumped into solitude and lost
their mind, as proof that solitude is unhealthy. Well, that\'s just
non-wisdom speaking. A person can do it too quickly, which means they
must just slow down a bit. You don\'t have to abandon the goal of
solitude just because you don\'t know how to develop it correctly.
Whether you go too fast or too slowly, it does not compromise the
quality of the goal, which is the delighting in solitude.

Whether it\'s a layperson or a monk, doesn\'t matter, you review your
mind, reflect upon and see whether you are ready to live in solitude?
Without having anything to do, without having any interactions for the
majority of my day? Would I be able to just be with myself? Or would I
have to extra commit to some sort of meditation technique to manage
solitude? Would I have to keep finding things to do so that I don\'t
drown? Do I delight in solitude, am I at ease in solitude, do I prefer
it?

Delighting in solitude takes work. But this shouldn\'t be confused with
someone who \'delights\' in solitude on account of their inability to
cope with others or because they hate others. Those are wrong reasons
and they\'re going to become obvious to whoever goes into solitude.

So ask yourself, \"Am I ready for this?\" No. Okay, so as a layperson,
you should really start preparing yourself for it, even if you never go
into complete solitude or ordain etc. You will get sick, you will die,
your senses will fail. How do you think it feels when your senses fail?
It feels like you\'re being confined more and more into one solitary
box. That\'s where the Buddha gave that simile of the four mountains
coming closer and closer from every direction and eventually crushing
you, as in you have less and less space to move, less and less
possibility of engaging with senses, which means less and less
possibility of maintaining the domain of sensuality, the domain of
distraction.

If your whole life is about avoiding that, but at the same time you
think you\'re practising Dhamma that\'s a complete contradiction in
terms. I\'m not denying that being with others can be beneficial, or
that a group of like-minded people can be helpful. But it\'s beneficial
in as much as a school is helpful for somebody who\'s learning a craft,
but the school can\'t do the craft for you. If you can find a person who
is equal or superior to you, then go and learn from them, instead of
associating with somebody who you can\'t learn anything from, even on
the pretext of Dhamma.

**Q:**​ It says in Samyutta Nikaya 45.2:

> \"​Venerable Ananda approaches the Buddha and says:\
> \"Venerable sir, this is half of the holy life, that is, good
> friendship, good companionship, good comradeship.\"
>
> \"Not so, Ānanda! Not so, Ānanda! This is the entire holy life,
> Ānanda, that is, good friendship, good companionship, good
> comradeship. When a bhikkhu has a good friend, a good companion, a
> good comrade, it is to be expected that he will develop and cultivate
> the Noble Eightfold Path.
>
> \"And how, Ānanda, does a bhikkhu who has a good friend, a good
> companion, a good comrade, develop and cultivate the Noble Eightfold
> Path? Here, Ānanda, a bhikkhu develops right view, which is based upon
> seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in release. He develops
> right intention\... right speech\... right action\... right
> livelihood\... right effort\... right mindfulness\... right composure,
> which is based upon seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, maturing in
> release. It is in this way, Ānanda, that a bhikkhu who has a good
> friend, a good companion, a good comrade, develops and cultivates the
> Noble Eightfold Path.
>
> \"By the following method too, Ānanda, it may be understood how the
> entire holy life is good friendship, good companionship, good
> comradeship: by relying upon me as a good friend, Ānanda, beings
> subject to birth are freed from birth; beings subject to ageing are
> freed from ageing; beings subject to death are freed from death;
> beings subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair
> are freed from sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair. By
> this method, Ānanda, it may be understood how the entire holy life is
> good friendship, good companionship, good comradeship.\"

**Nm:**​ As you can see, the Buddha describes what he means by
\"​*kalyāṇamitta*\" (good friend), which is not someone who is just nice
to you but someone who assists you in the cultivation of the Noble
eightfold path, even if you haven\'t met them, just as we haven\'t met
the Buddha, yet our entire holy life is determined by him.

Even though \'friendship\' with a Noble one is essential (even just to
the extent of hearing their Teaching second hand), still solitude plays
a significant part in development, it\'s not negotiable. That\'s why the
Buddha would encourage the monks with the right view to go into
solitude, to go to an empty hut or root of a tree. And the person with
the right view will actually do it rightly. They wouldn\'t be using
solitude for any wrong reasons. So if you wish to develop the necessary
ability to go into solitude, you shouldn\'t expect that ability
overnight. But that doesn\'t mean that you don\'t start preparing
yourself for it. If you want to develop mental strength or any form of
strength, you acknowledge your weakness, then you realize what you want
to develop. But avoiding solitude and developing random company instead,
would be the equivalent of recognizing your weakness, and then using
that as a justification to yourself that you shouldn\'t develop strength
in the first place and instead should develop more of that weakness
because that\'s truly the strength you seek.

## 171hh- The Beautiful side of Ugly, the Living side of Death

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200825 - 171hh - Developing the right kind of perceptions - Part 1 - Beautiful side of ugly living side of death.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/31){:target="blank"}

***

**Q:** AN 7.49:

> Bhikkhus, these seven perceptions, when developed and frequently
> practised, are of great fruit and great benefit. They are included in
> the deathless and bring the deathless to its conclusion.\
> What seven?\
> 1-The perception of the ugly,\
> 2- the perception of death,\
> 3- the perception of the other side(paṭikūlasaññā) of food/eating,\
> 4- the perception of non-delight in regard to the whole world,\
> 5- the perception of anicca,\
> 6- the perception of dukkha in anicca,\
> 7- the perception of anatta in dukkha.
>
> These seven perceptions, when developed and frequently practised, are
> of great fruit and great benefit. They are included in the deathless
> and bring the deathless to its conclusion.
>
> 1- When the perception of the ugly is developed and frequently
> practised, it is of great fruit and great benefit. That is what I said
> and in reference to what was, it said?
>
> When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of ugly, and often
> lives with such a purpose, his mind shrinks back, goes in the opposite
> direction and turns away from engaging in sexual intercourse, and
> either upekkha or the other side/pāṭikulyatā (the opposite direction
> of what the mind is attending to, paṭikkūlamanasikāram, I believe is a
> synonym for yonisomanasikaram,) gets established.
>
> Just as a chicken\'s feather thrown into the fire shrinks back and
> shrivels. In the same way, a Bhikkhu whose mind is accustomed to the
> perception of ugly, and often lives with such a purpose, his mind
> shrinks back, goes in the opposite direction and turns away from
> engaging in sexual intercourse. If a Bhikkhu whose mind is accustomed
> to the perception of ugly aims at sexual intercourse or does not have
> the other side(patikula) established. He should know \" for me the
> perception of ugly is not developed, for me there is no difference in
> former distinction, for me, there is no strong development.\" In that
> way he considers.
>
> If however, When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of
> ugly, and often lives with such a purpose, His mind shrinks back, goes
> in the opposite direction and turns away from engaging in sexual
> intercourse, and either upekkha or the other side (patikula) gets
> established.\" He should know \" for me the perception of ugly is well
> developed, for me, there is a difference in former distinction, for
> me, there is a strong development.\" In that way he considers.
>
> Bhikkhus, When the perception of the ugly is developed and frequently
> practised, it is of great fruit and great benefit. It brings the
> deathless to its culmination and conclusion...\" 

The term \"​*paṭikūla*\"​ is usually translated as \'repulsive\' but
it\'s literally the \'other/opposite side\'.

**Nm:**​ It\'s the side that is simultaneously there with the beautiful.
And in order to discern it, you need to see through the beauty that is
present. The opposite side of beauty cannot be found somewhere else.
Like, two sides of a coin, you don\'t seek a second coin to see the
other side of this coin. It\'s the same coin but now you need to see the
opposite side, the one you\'re not looking at. And the reason why
that\'s so important is that the most common way people practice
*asubha*​ is as a response to the beautiful, as in, they want to get rid
of the beautiful and replace it with the ugly. Which means you see those
things as separate from each other. You\'re not seeing the ugly within
that beautiful, which is how you would cancel(undermine) the attraction
to the beautiful, by seeing the opposite side of it (within it). But
instead, you\'re just trying to get rid of the beautiful because it
bothers you and replace it with ugly because that supposedly does not
bother you or it shouldn\'t bother you as much if you want to practice
restraint. But in reality, what you\'re doing, is just acting on account
of how you feel.

So the beauty is there bothering you and you just want to be free from
bother, which is fine. But how do you go about it? You go about blaming
the beautiful for the disturbance. Which means you don\'t really know
where the bother is and it\'s not in the beautiful. The lustful
attraction is not in the beautiful. It\'s in your attitude towards it.

**Q:**​ Because you don\'t see the nature of that beautiful thing
that\'s why you\'re attracted to it.

**Nm:**​ Exactly, and you will not see its nature, because now you think
\"the attraction is in the beautiful, so all I need to do is replace the
beautiful with images of ugly, and then I\'m free from attraction\". No,
and that\'s exactly what happened to many monks who were practising
wrongly. They started getting attracted to the ugly, to the disgusting
things, to corpses and so on. Because they were wrongly attending.

The right attention it\'s how you attend those things, within them. So
while beautiful is present, you have a chance to discern correctly,
​\'*yonisomanasikara*\',​ to attend correctly, to attend to the opposite
side that\'s there implicitly. Which is why freedom from the side that
is beautiful is possible. You don\'t have to do anything in response to
it, you just need to see through it. And that\'s why, if you actually
develop that ​\'*patikulamanasikara*\'​, it then doesn\'t matter, what
type of beautiful perception you encounter, later on, the mind remains
equally developed in regard to it, the mind sees through it, because it
has seen through its nature which is universal. And when you see through
the nature of beauty, as inseparable from ugly, then you realize that
the beautiful is just less ugly, not as ugly, but still ugly. Which
means it starts serving as a basis for dispassion.

**Q:**​ So how do you cultivate the perception of ugly or these other
perceptions that the Buddha has encouraged? How would you establish your
mind in the ugly right now? How would you do that? How would you discern
the opposite side?

**Nm:**​ You need to check your mind,\" Is there lust here now?\", as
in, is there presently enduring attraction to beautiful, right here,
right now? Then the answer is no, but then, could there be lust in your
mind, as in, in the future, \"Is my mind liable to become attracted
again to something of sensual nature?\"

The point is, you want to recognize that the possibility of lust,
aversion, delusion, manifesting in your experience is already the lust,
aversion, delusion, in your experience, just on a subtler level. How
would you know this possibility of lust arising in the future unless
that possibility of lust is already present right here, right now, which
is how you know it.

The possibility of lust is there because the basis for lust is there,
you haven\'t abandoned it. So circumstantially, you\'re not
particularly, experiencing any lust right here right now. But the whole
basis, the whole domain of being liable to lust is still there. You
haven\'t abandoned it. So can these things arise in the future? Yes,
means you\'re presently maintaining the basis, and when the conditions
are right, lust will arise on account of the basis that is being
maintained.

What is the basis for lust arising?

**Q:** ​Valuing of pleasure

**Nm:**​ Exactly, so you\'re not engaging in any sensual pleasure now,
yet you\'re maintaining the view that that pleasure is valuable. Which
is enough to maintain the basis for future lust to arise. However, if
you see the extent of the danger of that wrong view that pleasure is
valuable, you will free yourself from sensuality. As the Buddha once
said, \"For as long as I did not understand the extent of the danger in
regard to gratification, I did not claim to be fully free from sensual
desires. But when I understood the danger, then I understood the escape,
then I claimed to be fully free from sensual desires\".

So within the beautiful, the opposite side of the beautiful is the
danger defined by that beautiful. The danger is the attraction to the
beautiful which is based upon the ​*asubha*/​ the ugly.

The development of that perception of danger means the discernment of
the implicit characteristics of what you are attending. The chief of
those characteristics being the danger. Having discerned the implicit
danger long enough, you will not need to maintain that perception
because it\'s not something that you created, it\'s something that you
have uncovered.

**Q:** ​The sutta continues:

> \"2-\... When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of death,
> their mind draws back from attachment to life, and either upekkha or
> the other side gets established\...\
> (continues as above)\...\"

**Nm:**​ The perception of death is the counterpart of this life here,
you can\'t just get rid of life in order to see what death is, which is
how people usually practice, ​*asubha*​, get rid of the ​subha and then
replace it with ​*asubha*.​

So \'the other side\' means that it\'s there simultaneously present at
the same time within whatever you\'re attending. Death is simultaneously
present as the other side of life. Even if you don\'t attend to it
necessarily. You\'re not attending the fact that you\'re alive, you\'re
just taking it for granted. That doesn\'t matter, in its nature, death
is implicit. And it wouldn\'t be implicit if there is no life. In the
same sense, the ugly would not be implicit if there were no beautiful.

So instead of following the direction that taking your life for granted,
offers, you start discerning that - whenever there is life, death is
implicit. You will then experience disenchantment with life, and it will
be impossible for you to remain attracted to it.

**Q:**​ The result of seeing death then is that whatever is happening in
life won\'t bother you because the passion for it has been removed.

**Nm:**​ Yes, because passion is not the product of life. Passion is the
product of you thinking or having a view, that life is yours, that life
is in your control, that life is not subject to change, that life will
not end, that our life will last forever. All those are implicit notions
that you have towards life. And hence passion.

If you remove the misconceptions towards life, there is no longer a
basis for passion. But, again, as I said, you cannot remove the
misconceptions by denying life. You cannot remove misconceptions about
the beautiful by trying to constantly get rid of it and deny it. You
remove misconceptions by allowing beautiful to endure and then seeing
through it.

If a sensual thought manifests, it says in the suttas that one must \"
obliterate it, destroy it, get rid of it\...etc\". But how do you do
that? It doesn\'t say that you must deny its existence. No. You get rid
of it by not welcoming it, by not delighting in it, by not entertaining
it. That\'s how you get rid of it \'indirectly\', so to speak. You get
rid of the sensual thought or you get rid of the intoxication with life,
by not carelessly welcoming it, delighting in it, entertaining it. So
when it arises on its own, you must not welcome it, which doesn\'t mean
that you must go out of your way and try and chase it away. No, you must
just make sure that you remain mindful of not welcoming it with any
gesture, and if you do that long enough, the thing will go away.

**Q:** ​And again, you don\'t have to go and seek out death or
possibility of death because it\'s already there.

**Nm:**​ If you seek it out, it means you still imply with your view
that the problem is in those individual things that you\'re now seeking
out to prove to yourself that you are not subjected to them. Just ask
yourself, \"Am I subject to this?\" Yes. So what is there to seek out
when it\'s already here? Can future lust manifest in me in the future?
I\'m not sure, means yes. Unless you know that it can\'t, that\'s the
basis for - Yes it can. So if you seek out individual examples of lust
to prove to yourself that you\'re not lustful, means you\'re lustful,
and you still think the problem is in those individual things that you
perceive, not in your mind of welcoming, delighting, entertaining.

So you can ask, am I subject to death? Will I be affected if my life
were to end next second? Yes, there you go. I don\'t know. There you go.
You will. So how can you then free yourself from death without denying
life by seeing the danger in life and removing slightest passion towards
life, while life is still there? And then you know, it\'s the passion
that kept me bound to life, that keeps you subject to death. Not life in
itself. Hence freedom from life is possible without needing to die. And
that\'s why when you do die as the Buddha would say, you will not be
reappearing anywhere else. Because you have severed any bond with the
entire domain of samsara.

Death is where life is, if you remove passion towards life, there is no
basis for death to apply to you any longer.

**Q:** ​The sutta continues:

> \"​3-\...When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of the
> other side(patikula) of food/eating, their mind draws back from
> craving for taste, and either upekkha or the other side gets
> established​...\"

**Nm:**​ Your ignorant default mode is that you prioritize the pleasure
of eating. That\'s what you put first. So even when you\'re starving,
losing the sight of that as the reason for your eating, you will be
automatically eating out of pleasure for the taste, not because of the
need for food.

The \'other side\' of the eating is that it\'s \'something you have to
do\'. It\'s a necessity. But by taking that necessity for granted, by
covering it up as a necessity, you then get picky, you start
preferencing tastes and start acting out of tastes. But it doesn\'t
matter how much you act out of taste, it\'s still within the necessity.
You still need to eat. That\'s the horrible thing.

The pressure of eating is there, but you ignore that because you take
food for granted and then on account of it you develop the priority of
tastes, the priority of pleasure. Which is fully within that necessity.
So all you need to do is uncover the fundamental need so that you see it
as that which comes first and tastes as second, not the other way
around. By covering up that need, that pressure, that hunger, that
unpleasantness of being subjected to it, you put joy for the taste
first, you put pleasure first. If you don\'t ignore the fact that food
is a necessity that you\'re presently subjected to, whether you\'re
starving or not, you will then not lose the context of why you need to
eat. No matter how agreeable or disagreeable the eating is, it\'s still
within the unpleasant fact of hunger. So when the hunger disappears, you
stop eating.

**Q:** ​In the Dhammapada verse 203:

> \"​Hunger is the foremost illness; Determinations are the foremost
> dis-ease. For one knowing this, as it really is; Nibbana is the
> foremost ease​\"

**Nm:**​ Hunger is an affliction and your way of dealing with the
affliction is not freeing yourself from being liable to affliction
altogether but in just finding the pleasurable aspects of affliction. So
you\'re not dealing with it, you\'re just managing it, covering it up.

**Q:**​ So that enjoyment of taste, cooking, recipes etc, comes out of
putting that pleasure first and putting that \'other side\', that
necessity of food second.

**Nm:** ​It\'ll be impossible to make the effort towards taste if you
are dispassionate towards taste on account of seeing the necessity
first. That doesn\'t mean that you will not taste if something\'s
agreeable, it just means that it would be impossible for any amount of
agreeable or disagreeable taste to disturb your mind or to pervert the
right order again, by putting first which is second and putting second
which is first.

Taste is always second to hunger, but for you, the taste is the first,
craving is the first, everything else is second, you even forget that
you eat out of hunger. Which is why people eat when they\'re not hungry
because the pleasure of taste is now the criteria. Doesn\'t matter how
refined the criteria you might have developed, it\'s still within the
need of hunger. If there\'s no need for food, you wouldn\'t be engaging
with food.

## 173hh- Dukkha in Anicca, Anatta in Dukkha

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20200908 - 173hh - Developing the right kind of perceptions - Part 2 - Dukkha in anicca anatta in dukkha.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/40){:target="blank"}

***

**Q:** AN 7.49 continued:

> 4-\...When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of
> non-delight in regard to the whole world, their mind draws back from
> the various beautiful things in the world, and either upekkha or the
> other side gets established\...

**Nm:** The perception of non-delight is for the uprooting of the
inherent delight or joy in regard to the world, senses and sense
objects, which is developed by seeing the danger of delight. The word
\'delight\' refers to that subtle attitude of acceptance or looking
forward to something, towards things that are pleasing and agreeable,
which are not a problem in themselves. The problem is you being unable
to NOT delight in the prospect of pleasure. \'Delighting\' means not
seeing the inherent danger. If you\'re seeing the inherent danger in
things you are not delighting in them or you will stop delighting. But
this non-delight doesn\'t mean that you hate delightful things, it\'s
just that you will not delight in whatever is agreeable. So if it\'s
agreeable, it\'s known as agreeable but there\'s no delight. If it\'s
disagreeable, it\'s known as disagreeable but there is no resistance to
it, which is the opposite of that delight.

**Q:** You end up no longer attracted to the beautiful things in the
world.

**Nm:** And not being attracted, doesn\'t mean that beautiful things in
the world cease to exist. And by the way, you can\'t just fabricate
non-delight out of thin air. You can only practice non-delight by
preventing yourself from delight. And the only way you can prevent
yourself from delighting is by contemplating and maintaining the context
of the danger in things that you are delighting in. So if you cultivate
non-delight, and if you do that long enough, then you don\'t have to
constantly keep reminding yourself of the danger because the danger is
inherent in those things. That\'s why freedom from those things is
possible in the first place. And it\'s by not seeing the danger, that
you build up the delight, so to speak, in the course of your lifetime/s.

You can abandon things that are non-essential, like agreeable sight,
sound, smell, taste touches, you can restrain from and can say no to all
of it. Because you know, the delight in them is bad. But that still
doesn\'t mean you understood the delight simply by saying no to these
things, because there are certain things you can\'t say no to, such as
eating. And even the Buddha as a bodhisattva tried to starve himself to
see if that would be the way to complete freedom. And he realised that
actually, it isn\'t. It was being done for the wrong reason. In other
words, the food was never the problem. So things that you can\'t just
say no to, such as food, that\'s where you have to practice developing
that context of danger in delighting, not that the food you\'re eating
is dangerous, but your delight is the danger that keeps you bound to
these aimless wanderings of samsara. And then if there is no delight in
food, you wouldn\'t care what you\'re eating, good or bad, because
however you eat, you eat for the right reasons, And that\'s what the
Buddha said in MN 77, in regards to eating:

> \"​Suppose, Udāyī, my disciples were to respect me because I eat
> little. Well, there are disciples of mine who eat a cupful of food, or
> half a cupful; they eat a wood apple or half a wood apple. But
> sometimes I even eat this bowl full to the brim, or even more. So if
> it were the case that my disciples were to respect me because I eat
> little, then those disciples who eat even less would not be respectful
> towards me\...\"

He continues in that sutta to debunk ascetic practice in itself as
worthy of respect and instead explains that he is respected because he
shows them the path out of suffering. His disciples know what is
important and what is not. And the quantity or quality of food is not
important. Whether you delight or not is important. And If you
understand the way out of delight, you wouldn\'t care if the person who
taught you that freedom from suffering is eating six bowls of food etc.
Whatever circumstantial action \[which is not based on greed, hatred or
delusion\] that the Buddha did, cannot invalidate the truth of the
Dhamma, that he taught them and that they understood. The point is, that
if you judge a book by its cover, you will put the cover first and the
message of the book second. Even if the 'cover' of the book
deteriorates, and doesn\'t necessarily uphold the greatest standard of
ascetic practice, if the message is impenetrable to criticism and has
made you free from suffering, then the cover is profoundly
inconsequential.

You can measure your practice, not by how much you can go without food
and how harsh you live and so on. You measure it, by seeing how free
from 'delight' you are, how clear you understand the nature of delight,
and how apparent perception of danger in delight is.

**Q:** 

> \"​5-\...When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of
> Anicca, their mind draws back from acquisitions, honours, and fame,
> and either upekkha or the other side gets established\...\"

**Nm:** The other side, the counterpart to acquisition, ownership, fame,
is the true understanding of that non-ownership or impossibility to own/
anicca. Anicca is change. But just saying "everything is changing" is
not personal enough. You want to see that, "Yes, everything is changing,
but so am I, my experience, my ownership, my body, my senses, my
feelings, my life, that is also SUBJECT to change". So that\'s why I\'m
saying that anicca is not about 'seeing impermanence'because you can\'t
see the impermanence of your life unless you\'re dead. But then you
can\'t see it. So if you wait for death, to show you that your life is
subject to change then it\'s too late. And that\'s the whole point,
saying that something is 'subject to change' means the possibility of
change is inherent within it without that thing having to change.

Understanding that things are subject to change, subject to suffering
means understanding that you should not wait for things to change to try
to understand anicca. You want to understand it while it\'s not
changing, while your life is there, You want to understand that it\'s
overall and fundamentally going to change because it has arisen.

The nature of change is that nature of non-mastery, non-ownership,
impossibility of control. You can control things within their arising,
while they\'re present. You have a say in your life now, but
fundamentally, you will not have a say when that life decides to change,
as in when you start dying or when you die.

In terms of acquisitions, they escalate into honours, which escalate
into fame, which is all the escalation of your sense of self. And In the
course of practice, a monk would first remove the coarsest layer of
conceit such as sensuality and anger, but then later on in the practice,
he will be removing subtler acquisitions of his nationality, clan,
family, cultural identifications etc

As for fame, it is inherently accepted and liked by people. Lack of fame
is inherently feared by people. That\'s why people irrationally fear
blame, even if there is no rational basis for the criticism, just
because there is criticism at you, you\'re already defending against it,
you don\'t want it. It takes a developed mind to not do that, to see
through 'the worldly winds', and all of that comes from the simple
appropriation of the very things that are in front of you, your very
experience, these five aggregates, the feelings, the intentions etc. But
if you contemplate that, not by saying 'this and that is impermanent',
but by seeing that this experience is because my body with its senses,
is here operating and I cannot do anything about that, it is subject to
change and I am fundamentally not in control. I can move, I can say yes,
I can say no, I can look this way. But all of that is within the
non-control. All of that is within the basis that I have no access to,
the basis of my aggregates. So, when they change, my entire domain, my
entire world and life of control will be swept away with it. And when
you can recognize that, through your experience right now that is in
your 'control', you can recognize that fundamentally THIS is all subject
to change. That\'s it, you don\'t have to wait for it to change, you
don\'t have to make a change to prove to yourself that it's subject to
change. You just need to stop acting out of it unwholesomely and discern
that whether you want to or not, 'being subject to change' is implicit.
That's what a thing is.

If you cultivate that perception of anicca, sustain it, maintain it in
its being (*​Bhavana​*), it would result in complete fading away of all
the acquisitions, dependence on honours, fame, notions of conceit.

**Q:** The mind will also not be upset by criticism.

**Nm:** What other people will think about you, justly or unjustly,
ceases to be your concern. You will not lose perspective on account of
that irrational fear of blame.

**Q:** And the pressure to make sure that others have the correct view
of you\...

**Nm:** \...that\'s gone as well because that\'s rooted in your conceit.

You cannot control other people\'s opinions of you. Many people can
understand that. But one thing is to understand that on a rational
level, and another thing is to let that rational level settle in so that
you\'re emotionally undisturbed in regard to blame and criticism
\[emotionally you cannot be touched, let alone mentally revolve around
it\]. And that\'s why you will be unable to lose perspective. So if
somebody criticizes you, you will be absolutely clear about where
they\'re coming from. And you could see if they have a point and you
were wrong in that regard. You wouldn\'t have a problem admitting it
either, because you\'re not irrationally defending your conceit, your
gratuitous ownership. Equally, if they criticise you baselessly, you
realize that\'s absolutely ridiculous, or simple untrue or their
criticism completely misses the point, and you wouldn\'t feel pressure
to correct them and rectify the world and make sure that everybody knows
the truth etc.

**Q:**

> 6-\...When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of DUKKHA in
> ANICCA, an acute perception of fear/danger becomes settled in him
> toward indolence, laziness, slackness, heedlessness, lack of effort,
> and unreflectiveness, just as one would have fear towards one\'s
> executioner with a drawn-out sword\...

**Nm:** The perception of danger needs to be established, the perception
that change of an unfavourable kind can occur at any time. Once you
recognise the weight of that situation, you will feel the discomfort
which is inherent in the fact that your very being is not your own. In
other words, if you recognise anicca correctly, you will be recognising
the inherent discomfort of your situation, the dukkha will become
apparent. And the clearer that perception is, the more of a'sense of
urgency' will develop.

**Q:**

> 7-\...When a Bhikkhu becomes accustomed to the perception of non-self
> in what is Dukkha, his mind is devoid of I-making, mine-making, and
> conceit regarding this conscious body and all external objects; it has
> overcome \'all measurements due to conceiving\'( vidhāsamatikkantaṃ)
> and is peaceful and well liberated\...

**Nm:** \"Measurements due to conceiving\" means what you conceive you
appropriate. You are measured/defined by the things you appropriate
(take as \"mine\"), such as your form, feelings, perceptions, intentions
and consciousness. When those things change, you are thus affected.
Removal of the conceivings on the other hand, means that whatever
happens with the things you used to conceive will not affect you
anymore. You will no longer be \"measured\" by it.

## 183hh- Becoming An Immovable Object

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20201117 - 183hh - Becoming an immovable object.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/76){:target="blank"}

***

**Q:** What is the middle way between asceticism and sensual indulgence?
Is it the practice of enduring (neither giving into or denying)
thoughts?

**Nm:** That\'s the way to cultivate the middle way.

From the context of thoughts or mental images that appear in people\'s
minds, sensuality would be the acting out of thoughts immediately
without reflection, without sense restraint, or any consideration.
That\'s pretty much what defines sensuality.

> \"Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> Not the various things in the world;\
> Thought and lust are a man's sensuality,\
> The various things just stand there in the world;\
> But the wise get rid of desire therein.\"

> -- AN 6.63

The nature of thought (mind state) might be sensual, but when it\'s
paired with acceptance, welcoming, and delight in it, there\'s immediate
acting towards it. The opposite way would be, for example, if you see
sensuality as a problem and then you try to deny those thoughts. You see
that you act out of sensual thoughts and then think that not having
those thoughts would be good and so you try to prevent them from
arising, which is the other extreme of self-mortification, the ignoble
way of self-torture. It\'s ignoble because it cannot bring about the
result you want. Trying to resist thoughts is not bad but denying
thoughts requires you to take things further. One thing is resisting
thoughts, allowing them to endure, and resisting you acting out of them.
Another thing is to think that you mustn\'t have these thoughts, to
begin with, that would be you over-reaching because that\'s not up to
you. That\'s why giving into those thoughts or trying to deny them, you
remain equally ignorant, bound with sensuality and self-mortification,
you are bound with the bait that Mara has laid down. So how do you then
not go into these extremes?

Sensuality and self-mortification can result in extremes but in
themselves, it\'s relatively subtle in the beginning. You denying
thoughts is not exactly extreme, yet it partakes in the direction of
self-mortification, it shares the same nature. All of the acts of
self-mortification that would come later on in someone\'s practice, of
such a kind, would all be sharing the same principle in common, which is
a denial of the arisen thought, \"I mustn\'t have it!\", and initially
the Buddha was the same when he was trying to find a way out.

There is no end to asceticism, you can always do more, even to the point
where the Buddha tried to stop breathing so that he wouldn\'t have
unwholesome thoughts arise, but he realised that that would not work
either.

People tend to dismiss EXTREME asceticism or extreme sensuality and
think as long as they do not commit to those extremes then they are in
the middle. No, if you are either overly accepting your thoughts or
denying them, you are not in the middle. The middle way is the way that
can discern the arisen thought, not act out of it, and not try to get
rid of it. Which means that the mind already needs to have been
developed sufficiently enough to allow the thought to endure without
jumping into the action on account of it. Therefore sense restraint
needs to be developed beforehand, virtue needs to be established because
that will give you a certain space to not automatically act out of
thoughts.

**Patient Endurance Allows For Wisdom.**

The beginning of right discernment is being able to allow thoughts to
endure without welcoming them. Thoughts arise on their own, that\'s the
whole point, and thinking that you can deny them already implies a wrong
view, whereby you think that you are in charge of those thoughts, or
that you are responsible for their arising. No, you are responsible for
their acceptance. You are responsible for delighting in them and acting
out of them. If you don\'t do these things and thoughts are still there,
that\'s not on you, but the reason why people still want to get rid of
those thoughts is because it\'s unpleasant to allow thoughts to endure
without acting out of it. It\'s easier to act towards sensuality and
it\'s easier to deny. The hardest thing is to allow it to endure and not
act out of it, because it can endure for days, and when you\'re not
acting out of it, that whole pressure and emotional charge is there.
It\'s easier to get angry and lustful, just to say yes or no, act and
express yourself quickly to deal with the pressurizing thought. It\'s
easier, but again, the only reason you are doing that is because the
endurance(manifestation) of the thought is first, which means that no
matter how much you try to give in or deny it, you always do it on
account of that which you are not in control of, and which bothers you.
In other words, all of your efforts to act towards or deny the thought
are futile.

If you want to deal with the painfulness of an enduring thought, when
you are not acting out of it, you need to allow it to endure so that you
can understand it.

There is no wisdom arising on account of sensual behavior or
self-mortification (indulgence and denial) because you just lock into a
direction and that\'s your principle of action, i.e if it arises you
just say yes yes yes, or no no no, and then you conflate that with the
idea of purity which makes you feel extra superior on account of your
great determination. And then you will realize that even the unwholesome
states that you wanted to abandon, the conceit, ego, pride, get
amplified instead of abandoned. So whatever the thought is, whatever the
state of mind is, you have to allow it to endure, and just ask yourself,
whatever state of mind you are now in, did you create it, did you press
an internal button which produced it? No, but because you think it is
yours, you try to engage in it or deny it. The problem is not in those
thoughts arising, the problem is in you acting out of it, either towards
or against, either way, you are affirming its grip on you, by your
attempts to wiggle out of it.

Allowing thoughts to endure without acting out of them, would be the
beginning of the middle way. Also, that\'s exactly what grasping the
\'signs of the mind'- *cittanimitta* means in the suttas. Grasping the
sign of your mind for what it is, its nature, the way it endures. The
reason why people cannot grasp the *cittanimitta*, the prerequisite for
the right view, is because they either act toward or deny their mind. So
you\'re either under-doing the restraint or over-doing the restraint,
but you are not doing the restraint properly either way.

**Q:** When you are watching the breath and a lustful thought arises,
some tend to think 'I must get rid of this' therefore I must just watch
my breath so that I don\'t have lustful thoughts, and if I can keep
watching my breath I will never have lustful thoughts again.

**Nm:** That\'s like the deer herd that ran on top of the mountain (Mn
25). They are not experiencing any temptation from the bait, for some
time, but they are not growing wisdom regarding overcoming the bait
altogether, which means when their food on the mountain runs out, or
when you can\'t sustain watching your breath 24/7, something will have
to pull you out one way or another, and then you are back to where you
were before, because no wisdom was developed, which would have created
an elevated ground for you to be on. When the suitable environment,
which was allowing you to not engage with the bait disappears, you get
trapped once again because your freedom from the bait was only
circumstantial.

By the way, there is no problem if you have lustful thoughts when you
are breathing and you attend to the breath. You can do that because it
is a matter of choice. The problem is when people choose to attend the
breath with the view of denying the thought. Not as in 'I will attend my
breath and allow these thoughts to endure in the background of my mind
because it has arisen on its own, I didn\'t invite it, I will allow it
to endure as long as it wants, I will not give attention to it, I will
attend to my breath\", but rather one should not think \"I will attend
to my breath so that this thought is gone, I will do away with it, it
doesn\'t exist!!!!\", if you think like that, you are engaged with the
thought and your breath is secondary because this lustful thought is now
your main concern. Like in the suttas when Mara comes and tries to tempt
the Buddha. The Buddha can\'t chase him away, he can, however, not
provide Mara with a basis on which to latch, and that\'s when Mara
leaves him alone. Thoughts of sensuality arise like flies buzzing around
you but unless you provide something suitable for them to land on, they
will just buzz off elsewhere.

In the suttas, it says that one should sometimes not pay attention to
unwholesome thoughts (MN 20), but you shouldn\'t do that at the expense
of denying their presence, which has arisen on its own. And it\'s
because they are present, that you don\'t give them your attention. I
wouldn\'t have to 'not give you my attention' if you are not here. So if
I am instructed to not give you my attention, it means I KNOW that you
are here, and for the duration of, or endurance of your presence here, I
will not give you my attention, but I will not pretend that you don\'t
exist in the hopes that you will disappear, that\'s just wishful
thinking and you are just denying the presence of the thing which you
had nothing to do with. That\'s how Mara traps you, affirming or denying
is his domain.

**Q:** Is it about being equanimous regarding a lustful mind state?

**Nm:** That would be the outcome of cultivating the correct attitude
long enough, whereby Mara will leave you alone. The pressure will not be
able to overwhelm your mind, but not if you just cultivate sense
restraint by itself. That\'s just the necessary basis to see the middle
way, the basis for you to stop denying thoughts/ states of mind, but
instead allow them to endure so that you become stronger than those
states, so to speak. Through having them endure and not acting out of
them, not losing your sense restraint, and not trying to deny that which
you are restrained against. In other words, cultivating the middle way
will eventually lead to equanimity, immovability, etc.

**Q:** Those mental states will be less intense.

**Nm:** Yes, but that\'s more of the side effect. Your concern should be
that 'you are not moved by those states even if they last forever'. As
the Buddha said \"be like earth, water, fire, air, that are not affected
by things that are thrown on them, etc...\"(MN 62)

If you want to make that a practice, that is done on the level of the
mental states, ask yourself \"What mood am I in? How is that mood
affecting my action? Am I lashing out? am I binge eating? Am I
irritated? Am I seeking sensuality? Am I express ing these things? Am I
being moved by these states of mind? If yes, that means I do not see the
mind for what it is, I don\'t see its nature, I am not grasping the sign
of the mind correctly. The sign of the mind is the enduring state of
mind that you didn\'t invite and that you shouldn\'t delight in it, but
just see it for what it is, an enduring phenomenon. When you start
seeing that, you are already understanding the mind to a greater degree.

You will inevitably start doing this practice wrong, but you have to
start somewhere, just don\'t take your starting place at face value,
take it with a pinch of salt, so to speak. Whatever you are doing, even
if it makes sense, don\'t immediately think that you are right, just
keep testing to see if it\'s correct, keep reflecting on just how
perturbed you are when lustful thoughts arise. Remember, when you do
start you will be starting on your own terms, which is the wrong way to
start, but you have no other way than that, but you have to start
somehow. You don\'t have to fabricate your experience to contemplate it
but rather, it\'s more like just finding the state of mind that\'s
already there.

You want to remove this idea that you are \'doing\' the observation of
the mind and start seeing the mental states as already there. Why are
you even able to observe a mind of lust or anger? Because the mind is
already that, you find it there already enduring as such. So whether you
are doing awareness of mental states or not, doesn\'t matter, what
matters is not losing that peripheral state of mind that\'s enduring,
whether you look at it or not.

**Q:** What to do when you have a peaceful state of mind?

**Nm:** You can do the same. Don\'t be negligent, or distract yourself
from it. If it\'s peaceful, then question it also, \"Did I create that
peace, do I know where it came from and when it will go?\" No, I am
subjected to it. It\'s agreeable and so let me not delight in that
agreeability of mind, so that when that changes I will not be affected
by it, and then equally when the state of mind is disagreeable, you will
not crave against it, which means it\'s not affecting you much, which
means you don\'t have to be fretting over it, trying to get rid of it.
And that\'s the problem, that it\'s affecting you, not that the state of
mind arose.

**Q:** The goal then is to not be affected by any state of mind\...

**Nm:** \...And seeing that the state of mind is discerned on the
peripheral level, not on the level of your attention. The mind is on the
level of sense organs, not sense objects. What you attend is sense
objects, sights, sounds, smells, taste, touch, thoughts, but the state
of mind is what\'s peripheral to that. For example, you can\'t have
angry thoughts if the mind is not angry. If you have angry thoughts,
then you can know that the state of mind which endures is a state of
anger, and at first, it will feel ambiguous because you want to have
things clear cut, where you can easily attend to it, but that\'s the
behavior of the untrained mind. Training the mind to the sight of the
peripheral image of the mind is what developing cittanimitta is i.e
seeing the mind for what it is, without over attending it, without under
attending it, and forgetting about it.

**Q:** If you cannot see it, then you cannot endure it.

**Nm:** Exactly, not seeing it means that you are either resisting it or
indulging it. If you have a view that you shouldn\'t be enduring the
mind, you will never see it, as in if you have the view that you should
be denying those thoughts, that represent the state of mind behind them,
you will not be able to endure it because your view is to not endure it.
Or if you have a state of mind that you habitually act out of, again
it\'s because you cannot endure it. Even if you cannot attend properly
in that peripheral manner to your state of mind (*yonisomanasikara*),
the only way that you would be able to do so is if you start enduring
whatever emotional mood you are in, not acting out of it and not trying
to get rid of it.

Sensuality is bad, so don\'t act out of it, but that doesn\'t mean that
you try and remove the thoughts that are there, because that means
you\'re engaging with it. You need to become immovable regarding that
which moves you, not try to get out of the whole situation and try to
move that which moves you. That\'s impossible, because how can you go
out and move that which moves you without being moved.

The only way to become immovable/ unaffected is to stop interfering with
that which disturbs you and stop being moved by it while it\'s there.
You are moved, by acting out of it or trying to get rid of it. So
allowing thoughts/ state of mind to endure, if they are pleasant, then
the endurance will be manifested through you NOT acting towards that
pleasure, and if it is unpleasant, the endurance will be manifest
through you NOT trying to get rid of it. That's the middle way.

## 185hh- Samsara Is Directly Visible

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20201201 - 185hh - GUIDED CONTEMPLATION - Samsara is directly visible.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1VCXXqOVgZ42EC0NwC_V4DGf3rSBUsR8e/view){:target="blank"}

***

Ask yourself can you stop your feelings? Can you stop your form/rupa
from deteriorating? Can you prevent perceptions from besetting you? Can
you not choose?

**Q:** What is samsara?

**Nm:** Samsara is usually translated as rebirth but it literally means
"wandering on" ( to move about continuously). It\'s a translation which
makes the meaning clearer because rebirth implies this life, the next
life, and an in-between place which is just me passing through from one
life to another. However, you are not being reborn, it\'s more like you
'still are' just here and there continuously on and on.

> \"Again, Udāyi, I have declared this method to my disciples. Fallen to
> this method my disciples could recollect the various manifold previous
> births. Such as one birth, two births, three, four, five, ten, twenty,
> thirty, forty, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a
> hundred thousand births, an innumerable forward cycle of births, and
> an innumerable backward cycle of births and an innumerable forward and
> a backward cycle of births. There I was of such name, clan,
> disposition, supports, experiencing these pleasant and unpleasant
> feelings and in such a life span. Disappearing from there was born
> here, with such name, clan, disposition, supports, and experiences,
> feeling these pleasant and unpleasant feelings in such a life span.
> Disappearing from there is born here. Thus they recollect the various
> manifold previous births. Udāyi, it is like a man who would go from
> his village to another village, and from there would go to another
> village, and would come back to his own village: and it would occur to
> him. I went from my village to that village, there I stood thus, sat
> thus, said this and kept silence thus. From that village I went to the
> next village, there I stood thus, sat thus, said this, and kept
> silence thus. From that village, I came back to my village. In the
> same manner, I have declared the method to my disciples fallen to
> which, my disciples could recollect the various manifold births such
> as one birth, two births\-\-\--Thus recollect the various manifold
> previous births\...\"

> -- MN 77

You are here now and then you are somewhere else without these memories
and recognitions, but similar aggregates and point of view, it\'s just a
wandering on, like you go to sleep and wake up another day, then you go
to sleep and you wake up like an animal. I\'m overly simplifying it but
only because sometimes reflecting on samsara can have an impact on
people, in the sense it brings up a sense of urgency regarding the
practice because if you speak about rebirth it sounds like it\'s just
out of your hands, it\'s just how the universe works, you just come and
go here and there, but the birth itself is not the beginning.

Imagine now for instance if someone were to offer you to restart this
life, go back and become a toddler without being able to keep all of
your memories of everything that you have been through, that all has to
be erased, would you go through the same ordeal again, just in this life
that you already know, let alone in a realm that you are not familiar
with? When you think about it, you realize that the appeal would only be
if you can keep your memories and then you can restart the same life
again, and that\'s really how many people think about rebirth as though
they take things with them and just better themselves through rebirth,
but no, it\'s just a memory-erasing but you are still there, as though
someone were to wipe your memories and you start again without the
knowledge from your previous experiences. Would you want to do it again?
It would make you think twice because you might make even worse choices
than you already have. In a nostalgic hindsight, your experiences of
your daily pressures can seem quite pleasant but when it\'s there it\'s
never pleasant.

The Buddha said, there is nothing that you haven\'t been already. Beings
have been samsara for so long they have been everything, a mother, a
father, a killer, the killed, every animal, etc. The tedious repetition
that you have no memory of is basically what samsara is. You can realize
that this life is already samsara, this is already that wandering on,
it\'s one of many wanderings, and the actions you choose which will be
the directions in which you will wander on later. That is why beings are
the owners of their actions, the choices you make, and the things you do
determine in which direction you are headed.

**Q:** Is samsara something which encompasses us?

**Nm:** You are not in Samsara, it is not a universe that you inhabit,
it is your experience as a whole. What you have now is what samsara is.
In the same sense that you can recognize certain tedious repetitions of
day-to-day things, just extend that into infinity, extend that into the
next life and the next life, and so on, perpetually just repeating
because you forget. As the Buddha said, if someone can remember their
previous lives, their previous wanderings, the directions that they have
been in, all they will remember is these five-assumed-aggregates that
they have now. Those aggregates are your experience as a whole, which is
matter, feeling, perceptions, activities/determinations, and
consciousness, there is nothing outside of that. Samsara is the
aggregates which are bound with ignorance which keeps being repeated
until you make the effort to uproot that ignorance.

> \"\...When recollecting thus, bhikkhus: 'I had such a form in the
> past,' it is just a form that one recollects. When recollecting: 'I
> had such a feeling in the past,' it is just a feeling that one
> recollects. When recollecting: 'I had such a perception in the past,'
> it is just a perception that one recollects. When recollecting: 'I had
> such determinations in the past,' it is just determinations that one
> recollects. When recollecting: 'I had such consciousness in the past,'
> it is just consciousness that one recollects\...\"

> -- SN 22.79

**Q:** The content of one\'s experience changes but the general nature
remains the same?

**Nm:** The content changes while the aggregates remain the same and
that\'s the whole point. From that village to the next, the point is
that you are still wandering on, so it\'s not metaphorically speaking,
samsara is already here, it is what this life already is, a wandering
on, I mean ask yourself, can you stop your feelings? Can you stop your
form from deteriorating? Can you prevent perceptions from besetting you?
Can you not choose? Can you just switch off your consciousness? You have
no say in these aggregates they are just coming and going, taking
directions. That\'s already what samsara is. You don\'t need the belief
or proof of next life because you are already not in control of these
aggregates and they are already taking directions that often you don\'t
even want to go in and which forces you to have to endure things. Right
here is the samsara, you don\'t get it more direct than that. So yes,
death is not the end, and birth is not the beginning, it\'s just like a
rearrangement of the same thing, another way of repeating it. You don\'t
need the memory of previous lives or a special insight into future lives
to see samsara as wandering on which is something which you are already
fully engaged with as we speak.

**Q:** Samsara is something you are subjected to?

**Nm:** Yes, you are doing it and you can\'t just stop it, because that
would be another choice within the samsara, another choice within the
aggregate of sankhara. Can you not choose? Can you abstain from not
choosing without that being another choice? You can\'t, you are fully
within it, so you have to do it. Can you not feel? Is that even
conceivable? Can you imagine your existence in the most abstract terms
without a form or a body or some kind of enduring thing there?
Impossible, inconceivable. You are fully under the weight and control of
the aggregates, you can\'t stop them, you can\'t tell your aggregates to
go this way or that way, but you can start making the choices of a
wholesome kind as opposed to an unwholesome kind, and in that indirect
manner improve the state of your situation.

If a person starts to practice sense restraint their mind will develop
more patience, more calmness, more self-composure and strength and
that\'s already something which would make this wandering on in this
life much more endurable and agreeable as well. Is being impatient
pleasant or unpleasant? It\'s very unpleasant when you want something
that you cannot get, or you don\'t want something but you can\'t get rid
of it and you have to endure it, you\'re not patient. Is patience given
or do you develop it, either by circumstances forcing it upon you
whereby you have no choice or actually if you foresee it and start
making effort in the direction of developing patience? That\'s just one
example, so by making choices of a wholesome kind in this life, by not
pursuing sensuality, not being careless, and disregarding others, not
being immoral, and harmful to others by making that effort to keep
yourself in check, you are developing patience, which means that the
endurance of this samsara you will be able to tolerate it even more, the
pressure as well, because you developed that tolerance. Tolerance needs
to be developed, it\'s not a god-given quality. If you invest effort in
it, it will grow, if you don\'t it will shrink, and then you will be
even more pulled by the desires and your wandering will be even faster
and more hectic, more distracted like an animal. And that\'s why when a
rearrangement of this form occurs but your mind was pretty much a mind
of an animal, that\'s the form that you are going to be assuming and
that\'s what the Buddha said, if someone behaves like an animal in this
life, that\'s going to be their destination.

The body is a means of engagement with the world and sense objects, so
what you chose to engage with, the way you choose to engage with your
body, that\'s basically where your mind is heading, so next time you
might get a body which is more suitable for the level of engagement you
want or are choosing. If your mind was engaging with sense objects on
the level of animal passion, madness and thirst, then you are going to
get a body which is much more suited for that. That\'s why dogs have a
smell much stronger than humans because that\'s how much more they are
pulled by the sense objects. You might smell something nice but it
won\'t make you lose your mind like a dog. If you don\'t make the effort
and start giving in to losing your mind on account of sense objects,
then yes you will get a form which supports what you want, what you keep
choosing. If you develop choices which abstain from sense objects then
you don\'t need sense organs, so when the rearrangement happens, so to
speak, you will get much fewer sense organs like in the suttas when the
Buddha describes the celestial type bodies which are more refined , you
would not call them bodies from our point of view.

And again future life, previous life doesn\'t matter, what matters is to
recognize the nature of aimless wandering on and that the aim you might
have within that wandering on is fundamentally aimless, so even if you
have a great mundane purpose in this life, means it\'s still mundane and
will not change the state of this aimless wandering on, your aim is only
relative and when the time comes for thing to rearrange, that aim will
make no difference, in other words, you cannot prevent the form from
deforming, getting sick and dying that\'s inconceivable. You are on
borrowed time every time.

If you want to have a simplified example of what would correspond to
rebirth, it\'s not about being born again or dying, it\'s really about
losing the memory and that\'s why beings are bound to constant
repetition of the same thing because they have no recognition of what
they have already done countless times. After all, if you remembered you
would not want to do it anymore, you would want to leave that state of
affairs. Imagine now that someone comes and wipes your memory, just the
memory so your body is still intact, you are still alive but your memory
and recognition of anything you know including yourself is gone. So for
you, if you were to wake up from that state, although others would
externally see that it\'s the same person, the same body, but from your
point of view, the body and everything would be a new thing, yet it\'s
not a new thing isn\'t it? It\'s a new thing from that internal point of
view because you have no memory of it and that\'s exactly what rebirth
is. It\'s just losing the memory and not realizing that the aggregates
are not yours and they never were.

Ignorance regarding it has no beginning and that\'s why you should be
concerned about death and dying because everything you learn even the
wisdom you got unless it was of a significant kind will most likely not
play much part and then all you can do is to focus on doing wholesome
things because as I explained simply by cultivating certain habits in
the mind, when your memory is wiped clean you are going to start using
the body from the point of view of the habits you cultivated beforehand.
You don\'t have explicit memories of the habits but the inclinations are
there and those inclinations you are responsible for. They are there
because you have been choosing those things many times before. It
doesn\'t just mean that you now just carelessly give in to inclinations,
it just means that the presence of inclination is due to previous habits
which then also means that you could reshape them.

If your inclinations are bad, you can double down on doing good in this
life so that you develop good inclinations. So then in the next
manifestation, those inclinations will be what inclines you or directs
you without wisdom or memory to recall on. That\'s really what rebirth
in samsara is, the repetition of habits without knowing that you are
repeating the same old habits.

## 198hh- In The Seen Just The Seen

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20210223 - 198hh - In the seen just the seen - Thag 16.5.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1V4b4F9c8KWnbjSkdam3dzkNEoDrk_8RU/view){:target="blank"}

***

> "What do you think, Māluṅkyaputta? The forms cognizable via the eye
> that are unseen by you---that you have never before seen, that you
> don't see, and that are not to be seen by you: Do you have any desire
> or passion or love there?\`\` \'\'No, lord."
>
> "The sounds that are cognizable via the ear..."The aromas cognizable
> via the nose..."The flavors are cognizable via the tongue..."The
> tactile sensations cognizable via the body..."The ideas/phenomena
> cognizable via the intellect that are uncognizable by you--that you
> have never before cognised, that you don't cognise, and that are not
> to be cognised by you: Do you have any desire or passion or love
> there?" "No, lord."
>
> "Then, Māluṅkyaputta, with regard to phenomena to be seen, heard,
> sensed, or cognized: In reference to the seen, there will be only the
> seen. In reference to the heard, only the heard. In reference to the
> sensed, only the sensed. In reference to the cognized, only the
> cognized. That is how you should train yourself. When for you there
> will be only the seen in reference to the seen, only the heard in
> reference to the heard, only the sensed in reference to the sensed,
> only the cognized in reference to the cognized, then, Māluṅkyaputta,
> there is no you in connection with that. When there is no you in
> connection with that, there is no you there. When there is no you
> there, you are neither here nor yonder nor between the two. This, just
> this, is the end of suffering."
>
> "I understand in detail the meaning of what the Blessed One has said
> in brief:"Having seen a sight, (Having heard a sound, smelled a smell,
> tasted a taste, touched a touch, known a phenomenon\...)
> recollectedness is forgotten when attending to the sign of the
> 'beloved'. He experiences an impassioned mind and he keeps holding.
> For him, with the arising of sights, various feelings increase. For
> him, the mind is spoiled by desire and irritation. Accumulating
> suffering in this way, Nibbana is said to be far away.
>
> "He is not impassioned by sights (sounds,smells,tastes,touches, or
> phenomena...).Having seen a sight he is recollected. He experiences a
> dispassionate mind and he doesn\'t keep holding. For one seeing a
> sight like this, while practicing, feeling is exhausted, not
> accumulated. He lives like this, recollected. Diminishing suffering in
> this way, Nibbana is said to be nearby." 

> -- SN 35.95

Can you have lust for things that you haven\'t seen before? That\'s
inconceivable because 'having seen something' is a prerequisite for
lust. You, however, are responsible for having lust towards the seen,
and one of the reasons why a person would have lust towards the seen is
because they take for granted that which is seen, they take for granted
the sense organs as their own, as the providers of pleasure and so on.
So then whatever you see, it\'s only the thing you see, you are fully
centered around that but if you stop and think about it, it doesn\'t
matter what you have lust towards, just look at the context of that
experience and reflect: "Ok, I have seen this, but which is more, things
I have seen in my life or things I haven\'t seen?". You will realise
that things you see or have seen will always be less compared to things
you haven\'t seen. Even when some things you haven\'t seen become that
which you have seen, still there will always be more of that which is
not seen.

Can you have lust towards that which is not seen? That\'s inconceivable.
So the basis then, for non-lust is even greater than the basis for lust.
By thinking like this, you realize that anything you have seen was
purely circumstantial, you can realise: "I could have not seen it, it
could have not been". When you have that framework or that established
context, anything else you see, will be seen against that context of "It
could have not arisen", and you realise you have no say in that thing
arising, which in turn means that you will be less centered around
things you see, much less absorbed in objects, which means your basis
for the possibility of lust will be narrower. The loss of context, or
being absorbed into a sense experience without any peripheral awareness
in regard to it, that is where the lust breeds and multiplies.

Things you have seen are always secondary to things you haven\'t seen,
which means that your lust for the seen is also secondary. Now, if you
were to cultivate the recognition of everything that you haven\'t seen
as a necessary basis for non-lust, it will be impossible for you to
maintain the lust towards things that you are seeing here and now. Such
a practice is the undermining of that centredness upon things you have
seen, heard, sensed, cognised, and when I say 'centredness' I mean that
absorption in sense objects as a default mode of being. You need to
start eroding that gratuitous perception and one of the ways is
recognising that everything you have seen and will see, and seeing now,
is fundamentally circumstantial because it\'s always against the
backdrop of everything else you have not seen. That can put the current
lust towards things you have seen in a better perspective.

If you develop the context that everything that has not been seen is
greater, the desire for things not seen won't matter anymore because you
realise that it does not matter what you see in the future, it will
always be secondary to the framework of everything else not seen. If you
lust for new things, or things you have seen, that means you have lost
the recollection of the framework, the bigger picture, you have obscured
the context. It does not matter what you have seen, or how many times
you have seen it, by being seen, it becomes second. By acting out of
lust, you put those circumstantial things that have been seen, the
centre of your experience, which means you become dependent on that
which is already second. If you have lust, you are putting that which is
second first. The first (more primordial or fundamental) is everything
that is not seen, the circumstantial nature of seen, if you maintain
that recognition, it doesn\'t matter what future seeing or possibility
of future seen, it will all have to come within the framework of
everything else not seen, and that\'s exactly how you can develop your
mind above lust. You don\'t develop your mind above lust by never
perceiving anything beautiful in the world, you develop your mind by not
perverting that order ever again in the world, it does not matter what
you see.

The absence of lust is greater, that\'s why it\'s possible to overcome
sensuality because it\'s fundamentally second, likewise with non-hate
and hate. If sensuality were truly rooted in the things themselves,
things you have seen and the way you see them, it would not be a problem
that you could free yourself from, but the reason sensuality is a
problem is because it requires that perversion of perception, it
requires that distortion, it requires wrong view, and implicit risk of
commiting to that which is circumstantial.

Imagine someone offers you a new car to drive for free, but informs you
that there might be a bomb rigged to it, it might explode. Would you
risk driving that car? You wouldn\'t, because it doesn\'t matter the
appeal of the object, you have the greater context/framework that there
is a bomb that could explode, you realise that you would be basing your
entire existence upon something entirely circumstantial and uncertain,
whereby if that thing changes you will not be able to remain unaffected
by it. By maintaining that context, it does not matter what you sense,
you will not have lust towards it because the danger is apparent. You
cannot have the context of the danger, the risk, the circumstantial
nature and at the same time enjoy the object of that. The only way to
enjoy it is to not see the risk. It\'s mutually exclusive. And it\'s not
like you must now try and not see things, because if you maintain the
right context, you will simply not seek sights out and if they do arise
you will not be overwhelmed, afraid or trying to avoid it either. In the
seen there will just be the seen, there will be no avoiding it or trying
to prolong it, because in the seen there is now no more perversion of
the context of the seen.

> "\...That is how you should train yourself. When for you there will be
> only the seen in reference to the seen, only the heard in reference to
> the heard, only the sensed in reference to the sensed, only the
> cognized in reference to the cognized, then, Māluṅkyaputta, there is
> no you in connection with that. When there is no you in connection
> with that, there is no you there. When there is no you there, you are
> neither here nor yonder nor between the two. This, just this, is the
> end of suffering."

When you establish your being upon lust towards things, it defines you,
as I said, your ownership, things that you are committed to emotionally,
things you crave for, that is what defines you, that is what your sense
of self is. In the mind which is already perverted with lust, one
thinks: "\'I am\' is first", and that\'s the most fundamental distortion
that an ordinary person does, you think things are yours because you
think you are, but it\'s actually the other way around, you are, you
have a sense of self, because you keep owning things gratuitously and
you keep owning them because you don\'t see them as unstable, you don\'t
see them as subject to change, so even when the change happens blatantly
in your face, you don\'t see that as undermining your ownership, because
you assumed yourself to come first and independent. You just isolate
these examples when change goes against you and undermines your
ownership and sense of self and then try to cover that up by getting
something new, like possessions, and that\'s why sensuality, a form of
ownership and consumption is the only way an ordinary person knows how
to deal with any emotional discomfort that he experiences, he doesn\'t
know how to escape from painful feeling in any other way than turning
towards sensual feeling and trying to cover it up with new stuff. The
fact is that things could change against your will and fundamentally
they cannot be owned. By discerning that "subject to change" context,
you will be unable to not include yourself in it as well, you will start
feeling it. You start contemplating the vulnerable nature of your
possessions and sooner or later you will feel the pain of dukkha when
you touch upon something that is dear to you, then you start
contemplating that as perishable, and you can realise that you yourself
are also subject to that same perishing.

If you say, "Yes, the body is anicca", unless you feel anxiety and fear
on account of that, you are not doing or seeing it correctly or you
might be an Arahant, but again then why would you be even listening to
these instructions. The point is that you, your sense of self is because
there is the taking things as 'mine' first, it\'s because every single
time you engaged with the object of the senses you do so with ignorance,
without the right context, without maintaining the recognition that they
are vulnerable throughout the beginning, middle and end, it doesn\'t
matter what point you engage with things, they remain in their nature,
at their core *anicca.*

> \"\...When there is no you in connection with that, there is no you
> there. When there is no you there, you are neither here nor yonder nor
> between the two. This, just this, is the end of suffering\...\"

That\'s basically just the proliferation of that self view because it
grows infinitely, so by being defined by objects of your senses, by
chasing the pleasure of these things, you become a being in the world of
these sense objects. That\'s why a thought of sense restraint, a thought
of not chasing the sensual pleasure fills you with anxiety and terror.
You realise that it will kill you. That\'s why even people who are not
into Practice, when they chase sensuality - to the point where basically
if they do not meet the required threshold of objects, they start
experiencing very painful mental states. Equally, if you are not able to
give in to that anxiety and be overwhelmed by it and refuse to engage
with the sense objects to the same extent, then you are diminishing that
gratuitously proliferated being in that world of sense objects, and you
can do so by maintaining the *anicca* context of things you want to
engage with. 

After the Buddha gives those instructions, Malunkaputta says:

> "I understand in detail what was stated briefly by the Blessed one.
> Having seen a sight, (Having heard a sound, smelled a smell, tasted a
> taste, touched a touch, known a phenomenon\...) recollectedness is
> forgotten/confused(context is lost) when attending to the sign of the
> 'beloved'. He experiences an impassioned mind and he keeps
> holding...."

Having seen a form without the context you would be confused, as in you
are already putting it first as opposed to second, not seeing the right
order. It means you are pulled by pleasure and as I said in the
beginning of this talk, the way to not be pulled by pleasure is not to
never see things but to never lose the context - the recognition of the
right order. If there is lust, that means that there is the absence of
context.

> "He experiences an impassioned mind and he keeps holding
> (assuming)...."

He is assuming it in the wrong order.

> "For him, with the arising of sights, various feelings increase. For
> him, the mind is spoiled by desire and irritation. Accumulating
> suffering in this way, Nibbana is said to be far away."

Your mode of being becomes dependent upon the sights, etc. Which means
that now whatever else you start experiencing, like feelings, you are
just proliferating more and more. That\'s why if sensuality is not kept
in check by circumstances limiting access to it, everybody would be an
addict, and most people are addicts one way or another. What I mean is
that it is not a static thing, where you can just enjoy sensuality and
then restrain yourself. No, each time you enjoy sensuality that means
next time you will need to enjoy more of it, your being grows towards
it. You become more dependent upon it. It\'s not a static thing and
that\'s the danger you have to recognise as well. People think "Ok, I
understand this so I will restrain later", but later might be too late,
it might be too much. You only have a certain capacity to withdraw
yourself from it and if you overflow that being of sensuality, you will
not have means to get yourself out of it anymore. You became too
dependent.

> "\...Accumulating suffering in this way, Nibbana is said to be far
> away\..."

It builds up and then even when a person with all of that piled up on
him thinks about nibbana, he will think of it in terms of that pile up.
In other words, for him nibbana will be another sensual thing, the
greatest pleasure, the fulfilment of desire, which is just an extension
of everything else that he has been chasing so far.

What a puthujjana thinks death is, that is closer to nibbana than what
he thinks nibbana is, and that is why sometimes when the Buddha taught
nibbana to some people they were upset. Nibbana is the death of your
sense of self, your proliferated being upon sense objects. That\'s why
the true practice, practically speaking, more often than not, will be
unpleasant for people certainly in the beginning, because it\'s going to
be about undoing that sense of self, not finding that last missing piece
that will make you complete or help you abide in the ultimate joy of
bliss forever. No, it\'s about undoing that whole stinky pile of sensual
rubbish. And the more of that pile you accumulate, the more work you
will have to do to clean it up.

Procrastination is carelessness and that will only accumulate suffering.
For example, many people who read the suttas recognise what needs to be
done, but keep absolving themselves from the sense of duty to do it,
waiting for the right conditions, and that procrastination is not a
static thing. For as long as it lasts, it will result in more things
that you have to clean up. If you could not make yourself clean your
room when it was barely cluttered, then because of that procrastinating,
you will have 100 times more things to clean up,\...good luck starting
then.

> "He is not impassioned by sights (sounds,smells,tastes,touches, or
> phenomena...).Having seen a sight he is recollected. He experiences a
> dispassionate mind and he doesn\'t keep holding. For one seeing a
> sight like this, while practising, feeling is exhausted, not
> accumulated. He lives like this, recollected. Diminishing suffering in
> this way, Nibbana is said to be nearby."

There is no craving being cultivated towards sense objects. He
prioritises the context not the content of his experience.

## 199hh- The Uprooting Of Your Suffering

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20210304 - 199hh - The uprooting of your suffering.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/68){:target="blank"}

***

**Q:** Ajahn, you have said many times that the problem is that we are
affected by things in the first place. In other words, it is possible
for us to suffer, to get angry, lustful, confused and so forth. Thus the
goal is to not be affected by suffering in the first place, rather than
to only manage the symptoms.

**Nm:** That\'s the fundamental difference I often try to highlight. The
practice of the Dhamma is not supposed to help you deal with things that
bother you, it\'s supposed to uproot your liability to being bothered by
things in the first place. The Dhamma does not manage your suffering, it
removes the possibility for you to suffer in the first place. So the
goal for your practice is to not be affected by things to begin with.
It's not about having a perfect management system that will always help
you deal with whatever suffering arises.

And that\'s the problem already: suffering has arisen. You might be very
skilled in dealing with it, but you are not skilled in not having it
arise in the first place, and that\'s what should be your concern.

**Q:** When I get angry, I can find a method which can calm my mind.

**Nm:** That\'s how you start, you need to want to be free from anger to
begin with and then inevitably your first effort will be how to manage
and subdue the anger, but you mustn\'t confuse that for the actually
practice of the Dhamma, which if done rightly will uproot the anger, so
that there is no more burden for you to manage.

**Q:** Management is not the Dhamma.

**Nm:** It\'s an approximation of the Dhamma, but it\'s not the "one and
only way" which results in purification of "being" (satipatthana), the
way that removes all of the unwholesome. Management cannot do that, only
that direct insight into what uproots suffering, greed, aversion,
delusion works. The Dhamma is that direct, one and only path for
uprooting the suffering, not the management of it.

The knowledge of overcoming liability to suffering, once and for all, is
the Dhamma.

**Q:** I must then first recognise the fact that I am subject to
suffering.

**Nm:** The wise man who leaves the household life for the homeless
life, does so because he realises that he is prey to suffering. He knows
it\'s inevitable. And you need to have that idea clarified so that you
can see that it\'s the root of the problem. The problem is that
suffering is possible, regardless of whether you are suffering now in
regard to something particular. You must realise that even if you spend
your life avoiding major sufferings, the fact is that you are still
liable to suffering, you still have to make the effort to try and avoid
it.

The Buddha was neither sick, old nor dying when he saw a sick, old, and
a dead person, the "divine messengers", yet he knew that he was liable
to those things, and that is what the issue is.

The difference in management or uprooting is recognising that, "ok there
is no lust etc in my experience right now, therefore I am fine". No,
it\'s good that those things are not present, but is it possible for
those non-arisen unwholesome things to arise? Can you address that now
or are you waiting for tomorrow? That's the crossroads, are you headed
in the direction of uprooting or management? Most people go down the
road of management, thinking that they will deal with the problem when
it arises, while failing to understand that the liability to future lust
is already a problem ​*now​*. You don\'t have to wait for a particular
suffering to arise because the general liability to suffering is always
present.

Is there a chance for non-manifested lust or aversion to manifest in my
experience later? If you are not sure, that means that there is a
chance, and that\'s the issue right now even if those things are not
present.

It\'s a very common attitude for practitioners to think that if they are
not lustful or angry most of the time, then they are doing fine. But if
most of the time you are not lustful and angry, that means that lust and
anger is still a possibility, which means you are just not acting out of
anger as often as others but that's just because you learnt some
management method and you are certainly not uprooting anything if you
have the attitude that most of the time such things don\'t arise for you
therefore all will be fine. If you ask yourself could they arise in the
future and if the answer is yes, then you can know all is not well.

You have to train your mind to start seeing these possibilities of anger
etc as actually present because they are actually present.

If your idea of "way out" of suffering is skillful management, that
means that you need suffering to arise first. Management requires
suffering to arise first in order to manage it, thus management cannot
free you from that suffering, it can only deal with it once it has
arisen, and that\'s the relatively subtle problem, peoples naturally
tendency is to manage the problem to try get rid of it but there is this
confusion which occurs, which is that through your management of
suffering you experience less dukkha and then at the same time you start
tacitly assuming and hoping that all you have to do is manage your
suffering long enough and then somehow your liability to dukkha will
disappear. But that liability will not just disappear or evaporate
magically and that\'s the point, the only way that suffering will
evaporate is if you evaporate it, if you understand the core of it, if
you pull the thorn out as the Suttas often say. It won\'t come out by
itself, you have to uproot it. If you keep managing it with the hope
that somehow your liability will disappear, that means your practice
revolves around wishful thinking and there is no direct insight, no
knowledge of what needs to be done for freedom from 'liability to
suffer'/Dukkha.

You might do a method that calms you down from getting angry but that
calmness is dependent on you maintaining those efforts in regards to
what is bothering you and so when something changes whereby you do not
have the ability to practice your calming method, you will be back where
you started because your method was just a suppression of anger. And
that\'s not inherently wrong to do in the beginning but it is wrong to
adopt a view that management will uproot the unwholesome somehow
magically.

The only way to uproot things is to directly see what uprooting is, and
I just described what that is, which is to recognise that
liability/possibility of anger, lust, delusion, suffering as the Dukkha
right now. And you can only sustain that recognition if you are keeping
the precepts and practicing sense restraint.

**Q:** So I want that possibility to be gone...

**Nm:** Then you have to understand where the dukkha is. Is the
possibility in itself the dukkha? Is the unpleasant feeling that you
have when you think these thoughts, is that the dukkha? Or is the dukkha
the gratuitous resistance towards that mental displeasure?

You suffer because you resist discomfort even before the discomfort
comes your way. You resist the thought of the possibility of discomfort
here and now and that is why here and now you experience dukkha. That\'s
why the Buddha did not say that feelings are the cause of dukkha, he
said that craving in regard to what you feel is the cause of dukkha. So
when you have a feeling and a thought about the present, future or past,
it\'s your implicit attitude towards the feeling, either craving towards
or away from it, that is why that experience is dukkha. And you would
not see that if you haven\'t forced yourself to discern that that level
of possibility of dukkha is dukkha right now, you would not have seen
that if you were just fully bent on managing the dukkha as it arises, or
managing the dukkha before it arises.

Even when people recognise the possibility of future dukkha, they can
even take that as something to manage, thinking "I will do such and such
so that these things will not happen to me", which carries the implicit
view that dukkha is in those actual things or in your actual feelings,
and you don\'t see that it\'s in your attitude towards these things,
presently.

The relationship between craving and suffering is always simultaneously
present.

You need to see that the suffering is the present liability to
suffering, not wait for a particular symptom of suffering to arise so
that you can manage it. If you are not seeing your liability that means
you are not seeing where your craving is. You need to see the present
dukkha first in order to see its present cause. To the extent dukkha is
felt to that extent craving is present but if you are not seeing the
dukkha then how can you see that which determines it.

A way you can reflect: "why are you entitled to not experience pain?
Have you had a say in its arising? Can you prevent circumstances from
becoming disagreeable in the future? Is that even conceivable?" No,
it\'s a complete fantasy which is rooted in this complete misconception
of the problem being in these things happening to me and not in me
implicitly resisting the idea of these things happening to me.

So how do you stop resisting the pain? How do you stop welcoming the
pleasure? How do you remove craving?

By not trying to manage it and seeing it here and now already, and by
sense restraint because you cannot possibly be welcoming the pleasure
and just dealing with the unpleasant experiences when they arise, you
can\'t just selectively choose which cravings you want. If there is any
form of craving present means liability to suffering is present. So you
have to abandon craving for pleasure in as much as you have to abandon
craving against pain.

Pain appears, pleasure appears, you have no say in their arising, so why
do you then constantly entertain the attitude of "I want this\'\',"I
don\'t want this\", why do you go after the one and try to avoid the
other? Where is that attitude rooted? Why are you doing that?

You do it because you want to avoid pain, because you do not know how to
deal with dukkha, your existential discomfort. That\'s basically
management in a nutshell, and thats why its inherently wrong, even if
you are doing the Dhamma, following the Buddha\'s instruction, if you
are taking it as management, that means you are still maintaining the
same attitude by which you suffer in the first place, which is "I can\'t
handle this, I want to get rid of this" and that\'s the attitude of
craving.

So can you withstand the pressure of a feeling? Can you withstand the
pressure of a feeling if your physical behaviour is not kept in check?
If you do not keep a lid on the lustful or angry outpours of your verbal
or physical actions, can you possibly withstand things mentally? Not a
chance.

How do you withstand the pressure? By withstanding it. How do you become
stronger? By exposing yourself to things which will make you stronger.
You train that strength out of which wisdom can arise, which is what
enlightenment is.

Sense restraint is not optional, it\'s a necessary base which has to
remain throughout. By not giving into the pressure, you get to outline
what the actual problem is, which is your liability to future pressure
and discomfort, and you can only see that by not trying to manage the
pressure to get rid of the pressure.

## 200hh- Gateway To Nibbana

[[source pdf]](/hillside_hermitage_archive/source_pdfs/20210316 - 200hh - Gateway to nibbana.pdf){:target="blank"} [[external link]](https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/70){:target="blank"}

***

Often I speak about the endurance of unpleasant or pleasant feeling. So
how would you practically do that? Or rather how would failing to endure
the arisen unpleasant feeling, manifest for you? If something bothers
you and you fail to endure it, how do you know that you failed to endure
it? What qualifies as failure in enduring it?

It is when you are doing something on account of it or when you are
acting out of it. Acting out of anger or lust that you fail to endure.
Even though the action that you did was not sufficient enough to
constitute a breach in your precepts, nevertheless, you know for
yourself that YOU CHOSE to act out of lust, aversion or distraction.
That\'s how you know you failed to endure the pressure of an arisen
feeling.

Now what do you do in order to endure the pressure? You don\'t act out
of it. The reason why I am saying this is because you might think that
to endure the pressure you must be mindful of it, however that is wrong
because mindfulness will arise from your choice not to act out of that
pressure. It will arise depending on whether you act out of craving or
not. But if you think "I must be mindful of this" you will be DOING the
mindfulness, i.e. still acting out of craving.

That\'s why virtue and precepts come first. By not acting out of
discomfort which resulted from an insult etc, you know that you are
enduring it. However you might be enduring not acting out physically,
but now you must not act out verbally and when you become skilled in
that you will be able to endure mentally not feeding any unwholesome
thoughts. Which means that at any point throughout that proper way of
enduring, you are mindful, by forcing yourself to not act out of
craving. By prioritising the 'not acting out' you are by default
cultivating mindfulness.

It\'s your mind that is choosing to act out of lust that makes you
overwhelmed with lust. It's not by having the lust arise on its own. Its
mind choosing to accept or engage with ill will that overwhelms you. The
arisen ill will which arises on its own is not the problem. That
choosing is the gateway through which these things have to arise. You
invite them in, you open the door by 'acting out'. You don\'t have to
worry about being mindful every second. No, you just need to be mindful
peripherally, by not losing the sight of what you are about to do. For
example, if someone comes to your doorstep and tries to pressure you to
let them in. You are the one who chooses to let them in or keep the door
closed. Sometimes many people arrive at the door and you cannot bear
that pressure, so you open the door to try and chase them away, but by
doing that you open the door and that\'s all they wanted you to do. They
don\'t care if you open the door to let them in or chase them away, they
just want you to open the door because when it\'s open they will find a
way in. So often people think: "I must get rid of this thing", so they
open the door and engage with the lust or ill will and thus become fully
involved with it.

Not opening the door is the endurance that I am speaking about. If there
is unpleasant pressure, don\'t try to get rid of it. If there is
pressure towards pleasure, dont welcome it. Just remain unengaged with
it, keep the door closed, guard the gateway. You don\'t need to be
policing what is arising for you or what is pressuring you, or what
hindrance is currently present. All you need to do is stay at the
gateway because that\'s where these things will become a problem, and
knowing where the problem is the necessary basis for any wisdom to
arise.

The problem is not in something which upset me or in something I have
seen which made my mind lustful. No, the problem is when those things
arise, you have no idea where the gateway or the problem is and you are
automatically acting out of it. You cannot NOT act because you do not
know where the gateway is, because you just keep acting out of it.

The gateway which I am describing is the middle way, which you need to
see as an option. Even if you still choose to act out or not, at least
now you will see that the choice is on you.

**By abstaining from opening the door for welcoming pleasure or by
abstaining from opening the door for trying to get rid of pain, you are
then choosing the middle way.**

By choosing to not act out, you are choosing the middle way and then you
will start to see it. That is why if you guard your mind correctly, you
go above the five hindrances or anything that bothers you. You will
realise that none of those arisen things are a problem in themselves.
The problem is you being affected by them or involved with them from the
gateway where you chose to open the door.

Enduring the five hindrances correctly, your mind will rise above them.
It\'s not about preventing them from arising because it\'s not in
themselves that they hinder you.They become hindrances because of your
choice which you are responsible for. Hindrances cease to be a hindrance
but as phenomena they do not necessarily disappear altogether.

So how then do you practically not act out of these hindrances or these
unpleasant things? What do you do right now? You don\'t lose sight of
the gateway. By clarifying your responsibility of seeing the gateway you
will not need to worry about what specific lust or annoyance will arise
in the future, all you need to do is not lose the sight of this gateway
here and now, because all these things can only enter through the
gateway. By supporting the recognition of the gateway (and thus by
developing the gatekeeper), you won\'t be supporting the cause of your
problems, which is ignoring the gateway.

The gateway is your intentional choice to engage. Thus the entire Dhamma
can be boiled down to the simple instruction from the Buddha: \"
Whatever you know is wholesome, cultivate it and whatever you know is
unwholesome, do not cultivate it\". Do it or not, it\'s a matter of your
choice, and if you cultivate the right choices sufficiently enough you
will get to understand and uproot the nature of lust, aversion and
delusion, you will fully discern the gateway and be unable to lose sight
of it.


