---
title: Essays
author: Hillside Hermitage
date: 2022-06-24
category: Essays
layout: post
---

<div id="essays_by_ajahn_nyanamoli_thero.md">

## Essays by Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay1_feelings_are_suffering.md">

### Feelings are Suffering

How should one free oneself from suffering?

The very first step that one should make is to learn how not to *crave*
the cessation of suffering. At first glance this might seem simple, but
actually it is not so straightforward at all; for we cannot assume that
an untrained, ordinary person even knows what truly suffering is.

In order to know *dukkha* it is not enough just to suffer. To know
*dukkha*, one has to recognize, within the present experience, what *is*
and what *is not* necessary. The point is that, in the experience of
pain, certain aspects are inevitable, while others, are not. In
different words – the ‘painfulness’ of pain is suffering and not the
pain itself.

Let me get back to the opening statement that one should not crave the
cessation of suffering; why is that essential? The *immediate reason* of
our suffering, as the Buddha tells us, is our craving or *taṇha*. It is
because of *taṇha* that our experience of pain is *painful*. This
applies to the other two kinds of feeling too. Thus, we can say, that it
is because of craving that *feelings* are *dukkha*. In the first type,
unpleasant feeling, craving for the *cessation* of that feeling causes
one to suffer: the painful feeling is present there, directly opposed to
one’s desire for it to not-be, to disappear. In this way a discrepancy
is created, a discrepancy which is nothing but *dukkha*. In the second
type, pleasant feeling, craving for *more* of that feeling is
manifested, thus the *actual* pleasant feeling appears as unpleasant,
when attended from the direction of that increased pleasure which is
*craved for*. The present feeling of pleasure becomes inadequate, a lack
which needs to be satisfied. Again, the discrepancy arises, which one
tries to overcome by a further pursuit of various things in the world
which, will *intensify* his pleasure further. One hopes that such
attempt will ‘fill the gap’ within, but needless to say, that is
impossible since the discrepancy is actually being constantly
*generated* by the presence of *taṇha*, and *not* by the various objects
in the world.

<div class="english">

> “Thought and lust are a man’s sensuality,  
> Not the various things in the world;  
> Thought and lust are a man’s sensuality,  
> The various things just stand there in the world;  
> But the wise get rid of desire therein.”

</div>

> – AN VI 63 / iii, 411

When it comes to third type, neither-pleasant-nor-unpleasant feelings
(i.e. neutral), suffering is experienced as a result of one craving *for
feelings* themselves, since neutral feeling is not recognized at all:

<div class="english">

> “Neutral feeling is pleasant when known \[as such\],  
> and unpleasant when not-known \[as such\]”

</div>

> – MN 44 / i, 303

So, to summarize, one’s experience of pain is *not* the reason for one’s
suffering. It is rather the presence of craving, in one’s experience,
that suffering *is there*. As long as this remains the case, one will be
a “victim” of one’s own feelings, be they pleasant, unpleasant or
neutral.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay2_existence_means_control.md">

### Existence Means Control

In order for something to exist (*bhava*), in order for it to be, in a
full and appropriated sense, that thing has to be given first, in the
form of an experience as a whole. When I say ‘given’, this should be
understood in the sense that we can only “find” things as already being
there, in the world. (Cf. Sartre’s statement in *Being & Nothingness*
that every thing comes *with* past). The fact is that things can only be
found when they are attended to and this means that – fundamentally
speaking – they are *beyond* one’s control[^1]: one is not their
*creator*. Thus, one’s experience as a whole *cannot* be controlled; the
most a person can do is to modify an already given state of affairs, on
a more particular level.

Take the five-aggregates as an example: their nature is to appear,
disappear, and change while standing, at *their own accord*. It is only
with *upādāna* that this characteristic is obscured[^2], and in such
cases the apparent Self becomes the fundamental agent of the process
instead, or at least this is how it appears to a *puthujjana*. One who
is not free from *upādāna*, and the Self-view, confuses the fact that
the five-aggregates (or in this case the five-holding-aggregates) *can*
be modified or affected once they arise, with the notion that they are
controlled. This notion of control also supports (or feeds) the view
that ‘Self’ is their creator, which in return feeds that notion, and so
on indefinitely. This is why with ‘Self’ there comes the perception of
*mastery* over one’s experience – *“Attā*, ‘self’, is fundamentally a
notion of *mastery over things*.” (Ñāṇavīra Thera, *Notes on Dhamma*,
DHAMMA)

The Self then, as a “master”, appears as something different, something
*apart* from the five-holding-aggregates. Furthermore, the Self keeps
finding proof for its existence by constantly interfering and modifying
(when possible) the arisen states of the five-holding-aggregates. The
Self finds pleasure in doing so.

On the other hand, if the Self would see that, despite all of the proof,
its mastery actually *requires* (or *directly depends* upon) the
five-aggregates, the notion of control would cease[^3]. It becomes clear
that ‘Self’ cannot possibly exercise any fundamental control over their
appearing, disappearing, and change while standing. This is why by
contemplating this long enough, one can become an *arahat*:

<div class="english">

> “Then, monks, at another time the Buddha Vipassī dwelt contemplating
> the appearing and disappearing of the five-holding-aggregates… And as
> he remained contemplating the appearing and disappearing of the
> five-holding-aggregates, before long his mind was freed from the
> fetters without remainder.”

</div>

> – Mahāpadāna Sutta, DN 14 / ii, 35

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay3_with_birth_death_applies.md">

### With birth, Death applies

1\. We are born. We come into this world through our birth. As we shall
see in the following paragraphs, there are many ways that one *can*
think of one’s birth. However, from a phenomenological point of view our
birth is always here *with* us. The fact that one is constantly engaged
with the world of one’s desires, decisions and miseries, means that one
is born – his birth is *present*. Obviously, for someone not used to
thinking phenomenologically, it might be fairly difficult to pull
oneself out of the habitual way of regarding things as something which
is clearly defined, something palpable in one’s experience. For such a
person ‘birth’ *is* an event from the past, and we shall address this
issue in the paragraphs to follow. However, there is also a simpler and
easily overlooked reason for one failing to grasp the phenomenological
description of ‘birth’. In our language the term ‘birth’, as a
designation of experience, carries certain *past* connotations. These
connotations are absolutely gratuitous, and we shall see that the reason
for that lies in people’s *views* (*diṭṭhi*). The established usage of
terminology draws its significance (i.e. the meaning of its words) from
the most *common* views (on the level of humanity or a particular
culture), about the nature of experience. Needless to say, the common
views are rarely correct, especially when it comes to the experience of
an individual. These views can never represent the real *order of
things*. Thus, apart from the way we speak, and use the language,
nothing requires us to think that birth can, and shall *only* be
understood as a past event which has started and ended *in* time.

2\. Naturally, it is possible for one to regard, and understand to a
certain extent, birth as something which has happened to him a long time
ago, even without having the actual memory of the event. However, this
kind of limited understanding is only possible in the *objective*
(scientific) *view* of the world, and oneself. We can even go a step
further and say that it is precisely *because* of that view that one
thinks of birth (and other things, including ageing-and-death) in these
temporal categories. With this kind of view, the objective world in
front of one, the world which is *in* time, takes precedence over one’s
experience as such, which is *of* time (cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, *Notes on
Dhamma*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE, Dynamic Aspect, para. 5). One starts
regarding the objects that appear *through* one’s experience, as
something more fundamental than the experience itself – he puts second
that which is to come first, and he puts first that which is to come
second[^4]. As a result of this one starts regarding oneself objectively
as also being *in* time. Thus, time develops into a category which has
become *external* to everything, and all of the things appear as being
“within” it[^5]. Therefore, one sees that others are born, their event
of birth occurs in time, when he observes it externally. But because he
views himself externally too, he naturally (i.e. in conformity with his
view) comes to assume that his birth has *also* occurred some time ago
in the past. One also assumes, since he can see it in his everyday
experience, that death *will* happen to him in that same ‘external’
sense, “as it happens to others all the time”. By regarding things in
this way, he, as an individual, does not feel threatened by any of it,
until the *actual* death comes of course. So, we can see that one
doesn’t adopt this objective view voluntarily – when *avijjā* is
present, the view is developed naturally as the quickest way of offering
one assurance from a threatening world. The world and one’s experience
becomes explainable and measurable – one has regained *control*.

Let us get back to the phenomenon of ‘birth’, we were discussing. The
Buddha referred to ‘birth’ as: “Whatever birth, taking birth, descent,
coming-to-being, coming-forth, manifestation of aggregates, and
acquisition of \[sense\] spheres of the various beings in this or that
group of beings, that is called birth.” (Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M. 9/i 50)

Thus, although we can agree that birth is some sort of a “beginning”, so
to speak, a “manifestation of the aggregates”, what obliges us to think
that that beginning has *ended* there? The fact that one keeps accepting
and using the five-aggregates, the fact that one is constantly involved
with the world of one’s senses, doesn’t that mean that one’s
*manifestation* of aggregates is *present*[^6]? And would one be able to
desire various things in the world, if those things were not manifested?
If one were able to relinquish any attachment for his own body, would
one be bothered when that body falls apart and dies? It is because one
*affirms* that manifestation of the five-aggregates, through
desire-and-lust for them, that the manifestation *exists,* it
comes-into-being – with being, birth is (*bhavapaccayā jāti*). And when
one regards it as ‘mine’, one ages, falls sick and dies (and also
experiences any other misery possible in this life) – with birth,
ageing-and-death (*jātipaccayā jarāmaraṇaṃ*…). If there is no being
whatsoever, would manifestation be able to manifest itself? And if
nothing manifested, would one be able to appropriate it? And if there is
nothing which belongs to one, would one suffer on account of those
things breaking up and disappearing? No, because one has escaped.

3\. Let us go back to the question of when birth ends. Actually, we can
even ask when does birth start? The common view is that first one is
conceived, and than, after nine months or so, things culminate in one
being born. But when does the conception take place or when *exactly* is
one born? Is it with the formation of an embryo or with cutting of the
umbilical cord? Generally, the accepted view is that birth is over when
the baby comes out of the womb and into the world. And when it comes to
‘general views’, we all know that people often tend to blindly comply to
them, taking them for granted for the most (or whole) of their lives,
without even realizing they are doing so. In this case, ‘birth’ becomes
that which accords to the majority of opinions on that subject. One
chooses to conform with “what everyone else thinks”, since the majority
is “always in the right”. One accepts Heidegger’s impersonal ‘They’ as a
dictator of one’s own values, one finds *safety* in doing so. However,
no matter how secure the majority’s view might seem, all it takes is for
someone else to come along and say (perhaps supporting it with “the
latest medical research”) that birth actually ends when the formation of
an infant is completed in the womb, and that coming out of the mother is
not relevant as such, to question of birth itself. (Though, for parents,
even if they happen to be those scientists, this is probably *the most*
relevant part[^7].) If his utterance manages to change the general
opinion, if the majority of people come to accept it, we will have a
new, “more accurate” view on the nature of birth. The majority might
have been wrong earlier, but now it is in the right… until it changes.
And one can again choose to conform to that majority and make a choice
out of it, but no matter how far one goes that choice will always remain
*personal*, and as such, be on the level of *an individual*. So,
although one thinks what everybody else does, one nevertheless remains
*responsible* for that very thinking. It becomes clear then that by
choosing the majority’s opinion on a certain subject (in this case
‘birth), out of ’faith’ in modern science (or religion) perhaps, a
person chooses *his* *individual view* on given subject. So, by deciding
to accept the scientific explanation of birth, one decides that birth,
for him, is something observable, an event in the world. Thus, whether
one is aware of it or not, one is responsible for the *meaning* of
things in one’s experience. Even if we go further and say that we could
pinpoint the exact *moment* of birth[^8], when, for example, conception
takes place, and even if the whole of humanity, without an exception,
agreed upon it, nevertheless, this would not escape the *nature* of
‘view’, and that is to be ‘imposed’ onto things in one’s experience,
while at the same time directly depending upon them. In our case that
would most likely be the ‘objective view’, which is of course, based on
personal preferences and inclinations[^9]. Thus, for a *puthujjana*
coming-out-of-womb *is that* which is birth. His birth *exists.*

The Buddha, on the other hand, talks about the *nature* of birth, as a
phenomena (*dhamma*), in one’s experience. He does not refer to birth as
an occurrence in time, upon which even *puthujjanas* cannot agree, and
this can be seen from the usual *paṭiccasamuppāda* (*p.s.*) description.
In this description, *jāti* refers to that ‘nature’ of birth and any
temporal events are completely irrelevant to it. If there is no ‘birth’
whatsoever, if there is no manifestation (as such) of the aggregates, a
*puthujjana* would not be able to regard any event (in this case
‘coming-out-of-womb’) as *his*[^10] birth[^11]. Thus, one doesn’t suffer
on account of birth as an event in the past, one suffers on account of
the *nature* of birth in the *present*. In *p.s.* context, ‘birth’
structurally *precedes* ‘ageing-and-death’. ‘Ageing-and-death’ is not
‘birth’, but they wouldn’t be without it – together they arise, together
they cease. So, it is that with ‘birth’, ‘ageing-and-death’ (and
‘sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair’) *apply*. Consequently,
if we were to discuss *jāramaraṇaṃ*, we could say that it is because
ageing-and-death is *present*, that one will age and die (and suffer)
*in* time. But, if one could manage, through an understanding of the
Dhamma, to free oneself from ‘being’ – to bring it to an end – ’ birth’
and ‘ageing-and-death’ would cease to exist for him: all of the temporal
occasions for suffering would cease to be *his* suffering, since by
not-being born, one doesn’t have the desire to interfere with them any
more – one is free.

5\. Let me just say something more, for those who find it difficult to
accept that the existential (phenomenological) method[^12] can validly
be applied to Dhamma. We can put aside Sartre, Heidegger and those like
them, and disregard what they have to say about birth. However, even in
that case, still, we need look no further than the *p.s.* description in
order to see what the Buddha meant by ‘birth’. In Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M.
9/i 50, it is said, as we already referred to it earlier on:

When a noble disciple has thus understood birth, the origin of birth,
the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the cessation of birth…
he here and now makes an end of suffering. In that way too a noble
disciple is one of right view… and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

Thus, a Noble disciple, an *ariyasāvaka*, can by understanding ‘birth’,
in the same sense that he would have understood the Four Noble Truths –
directly and timelessly – free oneself and become an *arahat*. So, one
may rightly ask now: would this be possible, if ‘birth’ were not already
somehow *present*[^13], as a phenomena, in our experience? How would one
be able to understand birth directly and without involving time? If
one’s birth was indeed a distant event, in some maternity ward perhaps,
one’s fate would be sealed according to the Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, since the
event of birth has already passed and cannot possibly be understood
directly. Fortunately, one’s birth is not *in* the past, so one can, if
one chooses to follow the Buddha’s Teaching, cease to, in the present,
regard ‘birth’ as his and by doing so remove himself from the domain of
ageing-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair. One can
escape.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay4_appearance_and_existence.md">

### Appearance and Existence

For a *puthujjana* the world exists. He can perceive things in that
world, see them appear and disappear, he can see them changing. A
*puthujjana* can also affect his surroundings and modify things
according to own preferences, pursue the desirable experiences and avoid
the undesirable ones—the *puthujjana* is *involved*. This ‘involvement’
with things represents the very core of the *puthujjana*’s ‘experience
as a whole’. Most people spend the majority of their lives obliviously
absorbed in it, taking the course of ‘involvement’ for granted.[^14]

It needs to be understood that these ‘objects’, which the *puthujjana*
is fundamentally involved with, are *things* which his experience is
inseparable from, for the simple virtue of being *his experience of
those things.* For this reason we have to broaden the meaning of the
term ‘things’, from usually denominating ‘objects’ in one’s
surroundings, to include *any* experience whatsoever that arises and can
be discerned internally or externally (whether it is ‘objects’, ‘tools’,
emotions’ or ‘thoughts’). In that way the term ‘things’ would correspond
to what is meant by Pāli term *‘dhamma’.* Thus, the experience of the
*puthujjana’*s everyday world, his possessions, his desires and fears,
anxieties and happiness are all *things* or *phenomena*. All these
phenomena are completely *unknown* in their *nature*. This is why it is
crucial for a *puthujjana* to recognize that a nature of a thing
*exists.* This existence is not ‘in’ the world of the objects that are
ready-to-hand, not ‘in’ his mind, not even between the two—but, a thing
exists as an *experience*. Strictly speaking that’s all that can be
truthfully said, without resorting to presupposed theories, inductive
observations and explanations of the experience—the only thing that a
*puthujjana* can know for certain is that ‘there is an experience’. In
this way it can be seen that a thing *is,* its ‘being’ appears and
things such as pleasure, pain, emotional states, ideas, abstractions
etc. that people have in their everyday lives, are in this way all
*real*, they all come to exist as something that is there, that has
*appeared*. No matter how ordinary or extraordinary one’s experience is
or might be, whether it is common or unusual, that experience exists *as
such*. Even if one is going through the most obscure, ambiguous states
of one’s mind, those very states are valid in their nature (as obscure,
as ambiguous); whether they are intimate and subjective or the most
impersonal objective facts—they are all *phenomena*, they constitute the
experience as a whole (which is also a *phenomenon*).

“We do not *know* what ‘Being’ means. But even if we ask, ‘What *is*
“Being”?’, we keep within an understanding of the ‘is’, though we are
unable to fix conceptually what that ‘is’ signifies. We do not even know
the horizon in terms of which that meaning is to be grasped and fixed.
*But this vague average understanding of Being* *is still a Fact.*

However much this understanding of Being (an understanding which is
already available to us) may fluctuate and grow dim, and border on mere
acquaintance with a word, its very indefiniteness is itself a positive
phenomenon which needs to be clarified.[^15]

The same is to be said for the even more complex categories of the
*puthujjana’*s world, such as ‘actions’, ‘choices’, notions of ‘good’
and ‘bad’ and similar. They are not exempt from the phenomenological
nature of things. Good or bad, skilful or not, these things *manifest*
in one’s experience*,* and as such: they are real.

A very common passage from the Suttas which describes that which is
known as the ‘mundane’ Right View:

<div class="pali">

> Atthi dinnaṃ, atthi yiṭṭhaṃ, atthi hutaṃ, atthi sukatadukkaṭānaṃ
> kammānaṃ phalaṃ vipāko, atthi ayaṃ loko, atthi paro loko, atthi mātā,
> atthi pitā, atthi sattā opapātikā, atthi loke samaṇabrāhmaṇā
> sammaggatā sammāpaṭipannā ye imañca lokaṃ parañca lokaṃ sayaṃ abhiññā
> sacchikatvā pavedentī’ti

</div>

<div class="english">

> “There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed;
> there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world
> and the other world; there is mother and father; there are
> spontaneously reborn beings; there are in the world good and virtuous
> recluses and brahmins who have realised for themselves by direct
> knowledge and declare this world and the other world.”

</div>

> – (MN 117 / iii, 72)

This easily overlooked passage offers a very acute description of an
*authentic* attitude of a *puthujjana*—the attitude of recognition and
acknowledgment of the existence of things *as* phenomena (“*there
is…”)*. Someone might argue that one does not necessarily see the
spontaneously reborn beings for example, but the point is that one
should recognize the mere fact that there *could be* spontaneously
reborn beings—the *possibility* of spontaneously reborn beings *exists*
as such. And if one recognizes the validity of the appearance and
existence of that possibility, an *expectation of the concrete proof*
that can be obtained only through *senses* (i.e. one needs to *see*
those beings) ceases to be relevant, in the same way that a view that a
thing exists only if it can be experienced through the senses ceases.
This attitude thus discloses the *priority* of the *phenomenal nature of
things* (of one’s experience), over any other view which does not assert
that priority. And it is because of this very lack of the correct
priority that these kinds of views are *wrong views* (as far as freedom
from suffering is concerned). Thus, whatever one’s experience is,
whichever shape it might take—big or small, important or not, clear or
ambiguous—that experience is *there* in its own phenomenological form.
This by no means implies that such experience is necessarily understood,
it simply means that it is recognized for what it is, even if that is
as”something-which-is-not-understood”. This kind of ‘acknowledgement’ is
the authenticity that we also find the existential philosophers often
referring to. Together with authenticity, there comes the sense of the
*fundamental responsibility* for one’s own existence[^16] which is a
necessary prerequisite for a *puthujjana’*s ‘mundane’ Right View)[^17]
(which can then lead further onwards toward the ‘supramundane’ Right
View—the view of the Path). The reason why this attitude is a necessary
prerequisite is because only with this attitude will a *puthujjana* be
able to *understand* that he *does not understand,* and by doing so
enable himself for understanding.”[^18] The problem is, however, that if
a common man denies that which is right in front of him in his
day-to-day living, he denies the basic principles of his own experience.
In other words he is denying the most immediate *appearance* of things.
This results in phenomena not being seen at all. As long as this
attitude persists that man is going to be deprived of the possibility of
understanding the nature of the experience and consequently the nature
of his own suffering. That man is *inauthentic*.[^19] As the experience
shows us this is all too easily done. All that is required is to simply
never question the face value of one’s views of the world and the
experience and to never look further from one’s immediate absorption in
things.

For inauthentic man, when he does think about the nature of his
experience and the world around him, his views would generally pertain
to a common notion of a *hidden reality* behind the everyday world
(either material or mental, depending on the direction his mind takes).
What is meant by this is that he simply *assumes* that there is
something *more* real or fundamental in relation to what he is or can
experience. Simply put, if he was to assume a ‘mental’ type of reality,
as something which underlies the present experience, he would fall into
(one of the forms of) *idealism*; alternatively, if the reality was to
have a more ‘material’ basis, he would fall into some form of
*materialism* (or *realism*).[^20] Either way, the *puthujjana*
oscillates between the two.[^21]

For example, in present times, a spiritual/mystical view of the hidden
‘Reality’ (one’s ‘true Self’, or ‘universal consciousness’) would be a
form of idealism, while the very common and prevalent scientific
objectification of the experience would most certainly come under
materialism. These two can serve as the two prominent poles of the Wrong
View spectrum.[^22] These views differ from the Right View because as
they are focused on developing and providing *explanations* of the
nature of one’s experience, while failing to see that fundamentally they
are *derived from it*. No matter how plausible and accurate a theory or
an explanation of the origins and nature of the experience is, the fact
is that experience, as a phenomenon, will always *have to* come *first*.
This means that the explanation cannot be applied *retrospectively* to
describe its own origin which is *simultaneously present.* Nevertheless,
by maintaining this contradiction (which is an *assumption*) the actual
*structural order* of the experience is assumed *different*. And since
that’s all a *puthujjana* has in front of him, that *assumed nature* of
the experience *exists as such*. Because of this, the nature of a wrong
view is to provide a man with reasons and causes, which achieves nothing
except concealing and contradicting the notion of the immediate
appearance of things and one’s own existential responsibility. When
Reality is hidden behind the appearances, which are then no more than
‘illusory’, whatever a *puthujjana* does and whatever he feels ceases to
be *relevant*, even if it’s the most immediate and personal suffering.
If it isn’t irrelevant just yet, a person with this kind of view will
certainly strive in order to make it so by blending it into the
all-embracing view that the world is nothing more than illusion, and as
such whatever comes to be experienced in that world is disregarded
because it doesn’t belong to Reality. Consequently, by not pertaining to
Reality, the things in one’s environment can be ignored, and one will
feel justified in doing so. Thus, for a *puthujjana* of this kind,
things encountered in everyday life don’t fit into his *view of*
*reality*—they are dismissed, they are *not understood*.[^23] In the
view of scientific objectification on the other hand, the *puthujjana*’s
actions are neatly explained in terms of various collections of nerve
impulses, reflexes, genes, sensations and so on. In this case the
significance of one’s actions cannot extend beyond the threshold of the
molecular compounds of one’s body, which then serves as the *reason* (or
*excuse*) for the *puthujjana*’s desires, emotions, concerns etc.[^24]
In both types of views the responsibility for the immediate intentions
and decisions is abolished, by way of being included in the mystical or
molecular forms (for example “God’s Will” or genetic
“predispositions”)—which serve to explain one’s world. In either case
that responsibility is not *felt*, its *nature* is *disowned*. (Might
this perhaps be the *real purpose* of these views?) Thus, the
inauthenticity remains for as long as there is a view which places
itself *over* the existence as such, as something which is more
primordial in itself: the Reality *behind* or *beneath* the appearance,
the molecular structure of the world, again—*beneath* the things in the
way we encounter them in the world. Consequently, things like ‘good’ or
‘bad’, ‘results’ (of one’s actions), ‘being reborn’, ‘sacrifice’, ‘other
world’ and so on[^25] have no place in one’s experience.[^26] As such,
they become very ambiguous categories of one’s life, which an individual
can choose to accept and believe in, or perhaps reject according to his
personal choice. (The overall decline of morality in the world indicates
which kind of choice prevails.) In this way these things are pushed in
the domain of religion and ethics and regarded as ‘convictions’ and
‘observances’ that one can follow if one pleases.

Thus, whenever the priority of existence is not recognized, the *nature*
of things is obscured. Clearly the practice of Dhamma is then out of the
question. Nevertheless, for a *puthujjana* the possibility of seeing the
structural priority of existence as a whole over the particular
instances his Self derives from it, still remains, and only when he
admits this, the real work can begin.

***The Appearance in Its Priority***

So, with the mystical view on one end, and the objective, scientific one
on the other, the recognition of one’s personal existence cannot arise.
Because of these inauthentic attitudes, which are nevertheless *normal*
attitudes of the *puthujjana*’s everyday life, it would be correct to
say that for him things don’t even *exist*, in a correct sense of that
word. Only with the development of the rudimentary notions of
authenticity, through the practice of mindfulness and restraint and
reflection, can a *puthujjana* begin to notice, little by little, the
nature of his experience as a whole—*phenomena* can start to *appear*.
It is only in this way that one can understand what is meant by the
‘being’ of things, which is nothing fundamentally different than the
‘being’ of myself.[^27] Through the establishing of authenticity a
*puthujjana* can observe that things around him, and his experience as a
whole, appear and disappear. In the beginning it seems like this is
happening while his *sense of the experience as a whole* stays
*unchanged*. This ‘unchangedness’ holds priority over the *puthujjana*’s
experience, and that’s because in its nature it presents itself as
something which is remaining the *same* or *independent* (i.e.
unchanging) throughout the appearance of things which comes and goes. It
looks as if things that appear are ‘included’ within that general
non-changing sense of the experience. The appearance of things —or,
simply, things *belong* to it. Although there is no concealed ‘Being’
behind that which appears since the basic authenticity has been
established, this nevertheless results in the notion that fundamentally
things *are*, and *that is why* they appear. Thus, ‘Being’ is assumed to
be an ontological phenomenon that manifests itself *through* the
‘appearance’. One might not be able to find it apart from appearance,
but nevertheless, a *puthujjana* thinks—“things exist, that’s why they
can appear”. In this way one assumes the ontological priority of
existence over the appearance. Thus, a *puthujjana* places ‘being’ as
that which is *first*. This type of priority of ‘being’, is the
necessary basis for the *puthujjana*’s sense of ‘Self’. The notion of
constancy, the unchanging nature of the experience as a whole, the
independence, is the “extra-temporal changeless ‘self”’[^28] of the
*puthujjana.* ‘(The being of) Self’ is then the reason for things to
appear *,*they are appearing *for* it.[^29] This arrangement, this
*particular \[dis\]order* of things is also called: *sakkāyadiṭṭhi*.

If, presumably, a *puthujjana* wants to abandon this view, which is the
root of all suffering, the authentic pursuit must continue. What he has
to see is that this notion of ‘Self’, despite its independent character,
also *appears*. No matter how elusive or ambiguous it might be—it has to
be seen as such: as an elusive thing. Only after this is it is possible
for a *puthujjana* to see that the order of things imposed by the
presence of an assumed ‘extra-temporal’ phenomena in his experience is
the *wrong order*. Based on things’ appearance, and based on the sense
of the experience as a whole, there is no justifiable reason for him to
assume any primacy of the sense of unchangeability any longer. *There
is* ‘the sense of unchangeability’ and that too *appears*. Thus, the
unchanging ‘(sense of) being’ was, in a wholly gratuitous manner, given
priority over the appearance of things by being assumed as something
which does not appear. The reason for this was simply because this
notion of priority was never *noticed*.[^30] If a *puthujjana* sees this
*existing* notion that *appears*, (which is *that,* which is his
‘Self’), a sight of inseparability between ‘existence’ and ‘appearance’
will emerge. If a thing exists, that is because it appears; if it
appears, that is it exists. Neither the appearance nor existence can be
discerned or conceived without each other, and that is what is meant by
“to be is to be perceived”—*esse est percipi*. At this phase, the
assumption of a hidden reality *behind* the appearance is almost
inconceivable. The *puthujjana* understands that if anything is to
exist, it *has* *to* appear.[^31]

Thus, one’s authenticity grows. The attitude has undergone a
considerable change, from a *puthujjana* not even being aware of his own
existence, over the notion that things appear *because* they exist, up
to now, where ‘to appear’ and ‘to exist’ means just the same. Although
this is certainly far better than anything before, nevertheless this
attitude doesn’t quite yet free the *puthujjana* from suffering. He has
to continue, but this is as far as he can go on his own. No matter how
hard he tries to understand the existence, any attempt to do so will
throw him onto the appearance, and *vice versa*—whenever he looks at the
appearance all he is going to see is the existence. In one way or
another, the *puthujjana* will not be able to prevent himself from
falling into a view that ‘appearance’ and ‘existence’ are the
*same*,[^32] or—since the difference is perceived between them—he might
think that they are *different*.[^33] But then the ‘sameness’ is still
there, so perhaps they are *both-the-same-and-different*. Consequently,
he can negate the whole thing and think that they are
*neither-the-same-nor-different*. In either case, he remains *ignorant*
in regard to the two; he remains a *puthujjana*. If he is to change
this, he needs help from the *outside*; it has to come to him
*externally*. The *puthujjana* is not able (i.e. it is structurally
impossible) to “step out” of his experience, and see his situation of
‘being-a-*puthujjana’* as a whole. No matter how far he steps back, he
carries his ignorance with him. Only coming across the Buddha’s Teaching
can offer him an *outside perspective* of himself, which if cultivated
can ’turn him’ into a non-*puthujjana*.[^34]

The Teaching tells him that ‘existence’ cannot be conceived anywhere
*apart* *from* ‘appearance’, but also that it is *not* ‘appearance’ as
such; furthermore, and even more importantly, it also tells him that
‘existence’ does not depend on ‘appearance’ directly, it depends on the
‘assumption’ (*upādāna*)[^35] *in regard* *to* that which appears,[^36]
and this means nothing else then that the appearance, for its appearing,
*does not require* existence at all—it is actually better *without*
*it*.[^37]

<div class="pali">

> Na kho, āvuso visākha, taññeva upādānaṃ te pañcupādānakkhandhā, nāpi
> aññatra pañcahupādānakkhandhehi upādānaṃ. Yo kho, āvuso visākha,
> pañcasu upādānakkhandhesu chandarāgo taṃ tattha upādānan”ti

</div>

<div class="english">

> “The five assumed aggregates, friend Visākha, are not just assuming;
> but neither is there assumption apart from the five assumed
> aggregates. That, friend Visākha, in the five assumed aggregates which
> is desire-&-lust, that assumption is therein.”

</div>

> – (MN 44 / i, 299-300)

Thus this inquiry has passed ‘through’ the *puthujjana*’s ‘being’, which
must not be either denied (dismissed) or justified (explained), but
established as a *phenomenon.* It was seen that this phenomenon, far
from being a reason because of which things appear, actually depends on
the *puthujjana’s assumption* in regard to *that which appears*. In the
beginning, the *puthujjana*’s existence was a mere fact, of which he was
barely aware and this fact represented his thoroughly inauthentic Self.
However, now his existence has not only ‘appeared’ for him, it was seen
that ‘existence’ cannot even be conceived *without* that which appears.
In this way the roles were slowly reversed and the priority of existence
over the appearance of things has faded. Now, with the Buddha’s aid, a
*puthujjana* can further see that actually the existence is not that
which appears—it never was. It is the appearance that *exists*, by him
*assuming* it (or by being *ignorant* in regard to it.) The existence,
in order to be, requires *maintaining* (hence *upādānapaccāya bhavo*).
In this way a new perspective has emerged on the relationship between
existence and appearance, which reveals that, initially, the
*puthujjana* had the whole picture upside-down. The further pursuit of
this principle would simply carry further right through the center of
*puthujjana*’s being (who at that point would cease to be a
*puthujjana*) and complete the ‘reversal’ of this inverted experience of
his, in the same manner as one would turn a sleeve inside-out. At that
point that *individual*’s Being would cease without remainder.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay5_hierarchy_of_awareness.md">

### Hierarchy of Awareness

The fundamental nature of our experience can be described as a
hierarchy, which Ven. Ñāṇavīra tried to explain in his FUNDAMENTAL
STRUCTURE (NoD). We are what we experience, it is not possible to view
(or imagine) this hierarchy from ‘outside’, independent of us, because
regardless of how far one steps back, one cannot abandon the experience
as such.

The experience, whether mundane or sublime, possesses certain
characteristics, and the most prominent among them is that it is
*hierarchically ordered*. This hierarchy goes into infinity in both
directions, and this is something which can be seen from the nature of
*particulars* and *generals*. If we take a look at our own experience as
it is, we can see that there are two aspects which appear as being more
pronounced than anything else. Those aspects are known as *immediacy*
and *reflexion*. Together they comprise this hierarchy of the experience
*as a whole*. Thus, the hierarchy we have been referring to can be
called *reflexive hierarchy*.[^38] If we want to be more precise we can
say that immediacy and reflexion, respectively, represent two different
modes of experiencing this hierarchy. In immediacy, reflexion is not
directly present; it is there, but placed in the background. In
reflexion, the immediate object is seen from an *additional point of
view*, which means that once we reflect upon something, immediacy *does
not* disappear, it rather becomes secondary to the field of attention
but, nevertheless, it remains there:

<div class="english">

> “In immediate experience the thing is present; in reflexive experience
> the thing is again present, but as implicit in a more general thing.
> Thus in reflexion the thing is twice present, once immediately and
> once reflexively. This is true of reflexion both in the loose sense
> (as reflection or discursive thinking) and *a fortiori* in the
> stricter sense (for the reason that reflection involves reflexion,
> though not vice versa). See MANO and also VIÑÑĀṆA.” (NoD, ATTĀ (a))

</div>

The presence of this reflexive hierarchy, as can be seen from
FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE,[^39] generates another dimension to the
experience. This dimension is also hierarchically ordered, superimposed
upon the original reflexive one; dependent upon it, but at the same time
responsible for the existence of it. This simply means that their type
of dependence is not temporal, i.e. it does not occur in sequence. This
new hierarchy is the *hierarchy of awareness*, and although this
hierarchy cannot go ‘below’ the experience as such (awareness is always
awareness of something in-the-world), there is no limit for ascending
levels of this hierarchy. As the term ‘generating’ implies, with the
presence of reflexive hierarchy the hierarchy of awareness is also
present—*simultaneously*; and as was already said, the existence of this
hierarchy, makes the reflexion possible in the first place.

Let us try and say something more about the nature of superimposition,
which is relevant for these two hierarchies. When things are
*superimposed* they are not *directly* or *linearly* related. They are
simply *there*, next to each other and any thought along the lines of
*causality* distorts them as they are.[^40] This superimposed way of
existing is nothing else than what is meant by being *akālika*,
‘timeless’ or ‘beyond time’. Two things are there, dependent, yet not
directly related to each other. That is the reason why we said that with
the presence of reflexive hierarchy there is the *presence* of the
hierarchy of awareness. This precedes any notions of causality or of
time. Nevertheless, if we still insist on describing their mutual
relationship, the most accurate way would be to simply say: with
reflexion, awareness *is*; without reflexion awareness *is not*. This is
clearly a reference to *paṭiccasamuppāda* itself, so now would be the
right time to say something more about it.

*Paṭiccasamuppāda* is *a principle of timeless dependence*, i.e.
existential superimposition. With the presence of one thing the other
thing is simultaneously present, too. Thus, it is not possible to
conceive or imagine *paṭiccasamuppāda* without actually seeing it within
the experience, simply because conceiving and imagining, in its nature,
*involves sequence* (i.e. it is linear from the point of view of this
new hierarchy, and as such pertains solely to the reflexive hierarchy).
So, although hierarchy of awareness cannot go ‘under’ or ‘in front’ of
the immediate-and-reflexive experience, as we noted above, it can always
come ‘closer’ than it is.[^41] The point is that these two hierarchies
*do not touch* or *overlap*, they are *perpendicular*.[^42] When we say
‘hierarchy of awareness’, this should not be understood in a sense that
one is always aware. On the contrary, revealing this hierarchy requires
effort, which is being manifested through the practice of mindfulness.
Nevertheless, this hierarchy *exists*, and because of that the whole
other reflexive hierarchy is possible (see above). The difficulty lies
in the fact that this hierarchy cannot be *directly* grasped, and that
is because any notions of directionality originate from it.

The description made so far refers to the experience as a whole in an
*ideal* sense, i.e. the structure of experience has been described and
this structure is the same in *arahant* and *puthujjana*. The difficulty
is that the experience is, when we reflect upon it, already affected
with ignorance (*avijjā*). Ultimately, ignorance is nothing but the
*non-seeing* of the nature of superimposition of the two hierarchies.
Things are further complicated by the fact that even reflexive hierarchy
is not a simple order of different levels of generality of things; even
in this hierarchy, those levels are, in a way, superimposed in relation
to each other, and they are all ‘kept together’, so to speak, by the
fact that they can all be *attended* to from the perspective of the
hierarchy of awareness. This hierarchy unifies them, determines them or
‘keeps them together’. Here we can recognize the nature of determination
(*saṅkhāra*), which, as the Suttas tell us, exist through the presence
of ignorance (*avijjāpaccayā saṅkhāra*). Thus, when one is not free from
igorance, the nature of the hierarchy of awareness is not understood and
because of that, that hierarchy will be implicitly taken *par value*, as
a kind of owner-creator of the reflexive one, i.e. of our experience.
This hierarchy of awareness appears as being *towards* the reflexive
hierarchy, as if ‘pressing’ in the direction of it.[^43] Simply by
not-seeing that it is directly dependent upon the reflexive hierarchy,
this ‘pressing’ of the hierarchy of awareness is being followed at its
face value, and one comes to *assume and accept* that offered ownership
over one’s own experience,[^44], i.e. one comes to assume that there
actually *is* Self.

This is perhaps overly-simplified. As we said earlier on, the reflexive
hierarchy generates the presence of the hierarchy of awareness. This in
return, simultaneously determines reflexive hierarchy as such. However,
since there is no first moment of ignorance being manifested, both of
those hierarchies are affected by it, through and through. The hierarchy
of awareness appears as somehow ‘in between’ our reflexive levels of
experience, and that is what Ven. Ñāṇavīra meant by saying that they are
perpendicular (see footnote 2). As a result of the presence of
ignorance, this ‘owner’ which we mentioned above also appears like
something which is *somewhere within* our experience, ‘neither here nor
there’. This elusiveness is maintained by the lack of one’s capability
of an indirect approach,[^45] and as a result this ‘owner’ becomes
identified with reflexive or immediate or reflexive-and-immediate or
non-reflexive-nor-immediate aspects of life. In structural terms, simply
not seeing this ‘towards’ of the hierarchy of awareness, makes the
experience distorted, and following it means that one is going ‘with the
grain’—*anuloma*. Only, when ‘towards’ is *indirectly* seen as being
*directly* dependent upon things which are impermanent, then the
hierarchy of awareness will lose its ‘pressure’ and remain standing
there, “cut off at the root, like a palm stump.” (MN 72 / i, 487) At
this point the actual hierarchy is *paṭiloma*, ‘against the grain’,
i.e. ‘towards’ is seen as impermanent and because of that it ceases to
be the *reason of one’s actions*, i.e. Self is destroyed.

Thus, Self is the reason for the existence of Self, i.e. both reflexion
and immediacy are equally affected by it. Only when
reflexion-and-immediacy are seen as a whole as being determined by
something else, the nature of the Self becomes revealed, which is that
it is *not-Self* (neither owner nor master). Thus, that *thing* which
was regarded as Self, does not disappear upon realization of *anicca*
and *dukkha*, it ‘changes direction’, so to speak, and becomes not-Self,
*anattā*. However, even then, the thing remains there and what
disappears is Self-view,[^46] and that is because the hierarchy of
awareness has lost its ‘pressure’;[^47] thus certain assumptions in
regard to reflexive hierarchy disappear.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay6_papañca-saññā-sankhā.md">

### Papañca-Saññā-Sankhā

This compound has represented, to paraphrase John D. Ireland from his
Udāna translation notes, a stumbling block which even the ancient
commentaries find difficult to define. If the importance of the term is
to be deduced from the extent of its difficulty then indeed
understanding of this compound carries a lot of significance in regard
to grasping of the Buddha’s Teaching.

There are various translations of *papañca-saññā-sankhā*, with currently
the most prominent ones being either Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi’s “notions
\[born of\] mental proliferations” translating the term *papañca* as
‘proliferation’; or Ven. Ñāṇamoli Thera’s “calculations of perceptions
of diversifications” where he renders papañca as ‘diversification’.
Beyond these two, plus the PTS Dictionary definition, I am not familiar
in detail with any other different interpretations of this compound. I
am aware that Ven. Ñāṇananda in his “Concept and Reality in Early
Buddhist Thought” addresses this topic to a certain degree and also that
Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi based his views of the term upon this
interpretation[^48] but I, myself, have never actually read Ven.
Ñāṇananda’s book so my view on this matter will come from perhaps, to
some extent, a different angle.

To start with, the respective terms ‘diversification’ and
‘proliferation’ do not deviate from the meaning of *papañca*. According
to the PTS dictionary, *papañca* is “expansion, diffuseness,
manifoldedness” or “obstacle, hindrance or delay”. The other members of
the compound are defined as *saññā* (perception) and *sankhā* (sign or
characteristic). So the above-mentioned translations would, to some
degree, convey the nature of *papañca-saññā-sankhā* quite accurately
and, as Ven. Bhikkhu Bodhi says in *The Middle Length Discourses of the
Buddha*[^49] (endnote no. 229, p. 1204-5), “no rendering \[of this
compound\] is utterly beyond doubt”. The question which raises itself
then is not how to etymologically trace the exact roots and origination
of the compound, since such, a task in this case proves impossible in
the absolute sense (and many seem to agree with this). Rather, it is
better to focus and try to find out *within* one’s own experience and
practice what is implied existentially and phenomenologically in the
Suttas by this term.

At the risk of being incomprehensible on some points, I would try to use
‘descriptive’ language, rather than overly technical terms as people’s
general views are already quite firm in regard to such terminology and
it is very likely that they will be coming from a quite different place
than me, probably *too* different which could obstruct them from
understanding what I’m trying to say. In order to reduce this
possibility to a minimum I thought of using some more common terms in my
descriptions which carry less chance of being misunderstood. I hope I
won’t miss the mark too much.

Those familiar with phenomenology and the philosophy of existence should
not have any problems in understanding a statement like all our
experience is intentional or teleological or simply—significant. Each
thing (*dhamma*) which is being experienced in our everyday life has, as
its *inherent nature*, to point to other thing(s), within the experience
as a whole. The thing’s significance is not something ‘steady’ or
‘inchangeable’, although it often might appear so. The significance of a
thing is, rather, something which is being *acquired* through the
*repetition* of the respective experiences of that very thing. During
this, the whole perception of a thing comes to ‘grow’ in a course of
time, so to speak, and though there are certainly significances which
are *recognized* as common to all people, at a more fundamental level
they are all *individually* acquired and carried by each of us[^50].

Without going into greater details let us say that in the Suttas this
intentionality of experience is what is meant by the statement “with the
grain” or *anuloma*. Actually, it is probably better to be more precise
and to re-qualify this and say: taking for granted this intentionality,
holding it and appropriating it, makes this *with* of “with the grain”
to appear. In the *arahant*’s case, the ignorance is completely
destroyed, yet the grain still remains, i.e. things *do not* stop
pointing to other things, but this ‘with’ ceases to exist and is being
replaced by ‘against’ as a result of which we get “against the
grain”—*patiloma*. What has changed is the fundamental *direction* of
regarding this very *directionality of experience.* Thus, even in the
case of complete liberation things continue to be teleological or ‘with
purpose’ so they still point to other things and so on. All this is
being mentioned for the reason that the term *papañca* is probably too
often misunderstood to simply mean ‘mental proliferation’, ‘when one
thinks or analyzes too much’ or something like that. Although these
things do imply *papañca* (or to be more precise ignorance and
desire-and-lust), the above said nevertheless shows us that if *papañca*
is anything, it is certainly more fundamental than that. In support of
this we may add that *papañca* is frequently linked with *maññanā*,
‘conceving’ (for which see Mūlapariyāya Sutta, MN 1) which certainly
represents the most fundamental ‘occurrence’ in a mind affected with
ignorance. Thus, what *papañca* would imply is nothing less than this
very *intentionality* of our experience and its *tendency* to grow and
expand. However this can happen only when that ‘with’ is present i.e.
when the mind is not free from the bonds of ignorance and when it keeps
following things in their appearance— “…his consciousness flows after
the sign of form \[sound, smell, tastes, touches, thoughts\], is tied
and shackled by gratification in the sign of form, if fettered by the
fetter of gratification…”[^51]. And surely enough it is said that the
*arahant* is *nippapañca*—without diversifications, free from any
attachments (*upadhi*), free from burden *accumulated* in the past.

Thus, one’s world (everything which appears—*nāma-rūpa*), expands. One’s
views, desires etc. expand too, yet this should not be understood in a
momentary sense, which would suggest that they will somehow ‘shrink’
afterwards[^52] by themselves. Their *intensity* or the *intensity of
their presence*, once ‘accumulated’ i.e. came to being, is being
‘assumed’ or ‘held’ (*upādāna*) at that (new) face value. When this
happens—and it happens through the repetition of \[ignorant\] actions as
said above—consciousness “becomes established” upon that *degree of
presence*, which then becomes the *actual experience* of that *thing*.
Thus, the intensity of experience, that which appears as *nāma-rūpa*
grows (for more details see Mahānidāna Sutta, DN 15 \[ii,63\]). This
kind of pattern stretches from the most fundamental levels of our
existence (as seen in Mūlapariyāya Sutta), up to the coarsest ones which
we might say are, “resorting to rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls,
disputes, recrimination, malicious words and false speech[^53]…”, that
is *the directly painful actions resulting from one’s ignorance*. Thus,
based on the above, *papañca* represents the ‘diffusion’ of this
fundamental underlying principle with ignorance being *necessarily
present*, and consequently *papañca-saññā-sankhā* are all ‘calculations’
or ‘notions’, perceived and originated as a result of taking this
principle of diffusion for granted i.e. not understanding it.

To conclude, it is worth mentioning that this whole situation would be
much clearer if we can bear in mind Ven. Ñāṇavīra Thera’s description of
the infinite hierarchy of consciousness, the different levels of
generality of *nāma-rūpa*—*viññāṇa*. That is because
*papañca-saññā-sankhā* is not something which appears on a voluntary
level, as if one could stop it at any time; it stretches from the most
general (reflexive) levels of existence[^54]. What one is responsible
for, in that whole structure, is “delighting in, welcoming and holding
to…” the “source through which perceptions and notions \[born of\]
mental proliferation beset a man…”[^55]. Thus the hierarchy of
signifying things continues to arise (cease and change-while-standing)
but it no longer grows; it is “cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump”. Its root was ignorance in itself and with its absence everything
founded upon it comes to an end—one is free. In other words the
respective experiences of the *puthujjana* and *arahant* alike, share
the same fundamental nature of impermanence (arising and ceasing) but
the respective *intensities* of those experiences are changed; for the
*arahant feeling none* of it)[^56] and for the *puthujjana* dependant on
the amount of ignorance being present. More ignorance, more ‘intensity’,
things appear as more ‘pressing’ and one is easily prone to giving in to
desire-and-lust. The arising of things in the *puthujjana*’s mind brings
diffusion of perceptions and notions which, while not understood at its
roots, will in return diffuse further and further and so on. This cannot
happen in the *arahant*’s mind any more. His consciousness has ‘ceased’
so there is nothing to follow and diversify upon this teleological
characteristic of the existential structure, which will remain only
until his aggregates ‘break apart’.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay7_the_infinity_of_the_mind.md">

### The Infinity of The Mind (Notes on AN 1.51)

<span id="nyanamoli_essay7_the_infinity_of_the_mind.md__the-infinity-of-the-mind"></span>

<div class="pali">

> Pabhassaramidaṃ, bhikkhave, cittaṃ. Tañca kho āgantukehi upakkilesehi
> upakkiliṭṭham. Taṃ assutavā puthujjano yathābhūtaṃ nappajānāti. Tasmā
> ’assutavato puthujjanassa cittabhāvanā natthī’ti vadāmī”ti.

</div>

<div class="english">

> “Bright, monks, is the mind. It is superimposed by the defiling
> obstructions. The uninstructed worldling does not know this. For the
> uninstructed worldling, therefore, there is no development of mind.”

</div>

*Pabhassaram*—this could be translated as ‘bright’, and it should be
regarded as something lit up, shining, effulgent or *lucid*. To find out
how this term should be understood, one can bring to mind the term
*ākāsa*—space—which literally means ‘shining forth’, in the sense of a
space which is lit up. In MN 49, we can see that consciousness is
referred to as *viññāṇaṃ anidassanaṃ anantaṃ sabbato pabhaṃ,* where
‘non-indicative’, ‘infinite’ (or endless, limitless) and ‘completely
radiant’ (i.e. utterly and fundamentally lucid, not to be understood in
a sense of mystically beaming rays of light or similar), are the terms
referring to *viññāṇa*.[^57] The whole point is that ‘brightness’ is an
epithet describing the inherently *infinite structure* of the mind,
which is ‘defiled’ by the obstructions (i.e. made *finite*). In SN
35.202 the Buddha said:

<div class="english">

> How, friends, does one not leak? Here, friends, having seen form with
> eye, a monk does not incline towards pleasing forms, he is not
> affected by displeasing forms. He lives aware of the body there and
> with mind that is boundless.

</div>

A monk can dwell and live his life with a “boundless mind”.[^58] [^59]
He has understood the nature of the body *there* together with the
arisen structure of the present experience,[^60] which is infinite. By
understanding the infinite or boundless, any boundaries and finiteness
that were present as a result of that lack of understanding, are
removed. In other words, the ‘brightness’ or ‘lucidity’ or ‘infinity’ or
‘boundlessness’ are the ways of describing the *property* of the
fundamental structure of experience, which is the very reason why
overcoming the obstructions is possible.

*Āgantuka*—here it is translated as ‘superimposed’. It can also mean
adventitious, incidental, accessory. The main point that has to be borne
in mind is that the ‘obstructions’ are “incidental”, in the sense that
they are not caused by the *pabhassaramidaṃ cittaṃ,* but are
nevertheless there. The defiling obstructions do not have anything in
common with the brightness of the mind; they are simply “layered” there,
superimposed without actually affecting the infinite structure. Thus,
since the infinite mind does not need those obstructions, it can be
rightly said that they are completely gratuitous.[^61]

So, obstructions, or more precisely *avijjā*, have no *first point* when
they are manifested before which mind was pure, bright and unpolluted.
Because of this it is not correct to refer to ‘bright mind’ as an
*original thing*, as if it existed in a pure state *before* the
obstructions arrived. Since there is no beginning to the infinity, nor
to the beginningless *avijjā*, the notions of “first this, then that”
have no place to apply. So how shall this evident priority of the
‘bright mind’ be understood then? The answer is straight—in an
atemporal, structural sense. The infinity of the mind precedes *avijjā*
ontologically, so to speak, while they are there both, *simultaneously
present.* This should also shed some light onto why the structure of the
mind does not imply nor require the obstructions (hence they are called
‘obstructions’)—they are superfluous, unnecessary, superimposed. Yet,
the *uppakilesā* are there, and are not to be found elsewhere.[^62] To
put this all in different words: the infinity of one’s mind is a
temporally more fundamental than one’s own nescience in regard to it.
Furthermore, it is because of the nescience in regard to the *nature of
infinity*, that *avijjā* is *a beginningless* *phenomenon*. If infinity
has no beginning, how could the fundamental ignorance of that be
different?

This is not all, there are further implications of one’s ignorance of
the infinite structure—namely, *permanence.* The uninstructed worldling
confuses the notion of infinity (no beginning, no end) with the notion
of *eternity*, or rather *identifies* the two. In this way, a present
experience is regarded as eternal or permanent. What a *puthujjana* does
not see is that eternity implies infinity, but the infinity does not
imply eternity.[^63] Because of the nescience in regard to this, the
*puthujjana’s* experience of infinity *assumes* permanence. In other
words, his *citta* is regarded as permanent; he regards his Self as
permanent. If one would be able to see the infinity without eternity, or
even to see it as impermanent, the notion of Self, and everything else
that depended upon it, (which required the notion of permanence), would
cease without a remainder. Knowing infinity as something present
(i.e. arisen) but impermanent (for the very reason that it has *arisen*
on its own accord), clears the mind of any obstructions, any
superimposed interferences with the infinite structure. Hence it is said
that the *arahant’s* mind is *immeasurable.*[^64] His *citta* has been
developed to the structurally more fundamental state, and it is because
this state was always *possible* (but not *actual*)[^65] that
transcending the obstructions was feasible. In other words, if one’s
mind was *inherently* ignorant—i.e. *avijjā* structurally preceded any
experience—arahantship would not be possible. (See footnote
[\[61\]](#nyanamoli_essay7_the_infinity_of_the_mind.md__fn61)
above).[^66]

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay8_not_perceiving_the_feeling.md">

### Not Perceiving the Feeling (Notes on MN 43)

<div class="english">

> Friend, feeling and perception and consciousness-these things are
> associated, not disassociated. It is not possible to separate them and
> by separating them point out the difference \[between them\]. What one
> feels, that one perceives. What one perceives, that one cognizes.
> Therefore, these things are associated not disassociated. It is not
> possible to separate them and by separating them point out the
> difference\[between them\].

</div>

> – MN 43

The Teaching is for the one who feels. When one thinks “this is what I
feel”, that is what one *thinks*, not what one *feels*. Feeling cannot
be thought, it cannot be perceived. What one perceives is one’s
perception, what one feels is one’s feeling.[^67] Feeling and perception
are simply *there*, superimposed, independent and different in nature.

**“What one feels, that one perceives.”**

**Thinking that it is *the same* thing that one feels and
*simultaneously* perceives, means one *assumes* that \[same\] thing as
*independent* of that feeling and perception. That thing *is.***

**Thinking that it is *a different* thing that one feels and
*simultaneously* perceives, means one *assumes* that \[different\] thing
as *independent* of that feeling and perception. That thing *is.***

**Thinking that it is *both-the-same-and-different* thing that one feels
and *simultaneously* perceives, means one *assumes* that
\[both-the-same-and-different\] thing as *independent* of that feeling
and perception. That thing *is.***

**Thinking that it is *neither-the-same-nor-different* thing that one
feels and *simultaneously* perceives, means one *assumes* that
\[neither-the-same-nor-different\] thing as *independent* of that
feeling and perception. That thing *is.***

**Thus, through that assumption, one *identifies* that thing*.***

Whether one thinks it is the same, or different, or both or neither,
feeling is there*, regardless* of the perception in regard to it. Thus,
a feeling cannot be thought, it can only be *felt.* A perception cannot
be felt, it can only be *perceived.* One has to learn *how to feel*, or
how to *know* ‘that because of which’ the feeling is.[^68] This means
how to *discern* it from that which perception is. This cannot be done
by separating feeling and perception and examining them
individually.[^69] So how can one do it then?-

**By *feeling* \[the feeling\]*.* By *perceiving* \[the perception\]*.*
By *cognizing* \[the cognizance\].**

**By *cognizing feeling-*\[while\]{.underline}-perceiving.**

**By *understanding* cognizing.**

**By *not-conceiving* perception.**

If the superimposition of these two completely independent
simultaneously present domains is understood, the assumption of *an
independent thing*,[^70] outside of feeling and perception ceases to be
“a bridge” for the two. The ‘thing’ which is being *identified* (as the
same, different, both-the-same-and-different,
neither-the-same-nor-different)*,* is that “bridge” and feeling and
perception ‘meet’ or ‘come together’ because of it. That thing is
assumed *to be that* which one *feels* and *perceives*.[^71] In this
way, feeling and perception (and consciousness) also come to be
*identified*.[^72] Thus, that ‘\[assumption of a\] thing’ which
identifies the *unidentifiable* [^73] feeling and perception makes them
*manifest in* that *identity*-feeling and perception come to *exist*.
The identity feels, the identity perceives-*I* feel, *I* perceive.

**One feels pleasure, one feels pain, one feels
neither-pain-nor-pleasure.**

**One perceives blue, one perceives yellow, one perceives red, one
perceives white.**[^74]

One can be *aware* of what one feels; one can also be *aware* of what
one perceives. *Through understanding that because of which one is*
*aware of,* one *knows* the feeling and perception *structurally* cannot
overlap or merge or “be bridged” or identified;[^75] This makes the
*assumption* in regard to feeling and perception (as the same,
different, both-the-same-and-different,
neither-the-same-nor-different),[^76] *redundant*, *irrelevant*, *not
worth maintaining.* Why? Because it does not and it cannot make *any
difference* to the *structural order* of things (feeling feels,
perception perceives). If it could, the freedom from suffering would not
be possible.[^77] Fully understanding that whichever way one’s thought
(assumption) goes, the feeling cannot be *identified* as (the same,
different, both-the-same-and-different, neither-the-same-nor-different
from) perception, leaves that feeling and that perception just standing
there – *indifferent* to each other.[^78] [^79]

**Agreeable perception is assumed *to be* *that* which is pleasantly
felt;**

**Disagreeable perception is assumed *to be* *that* which is
unpleasantly felt;**

**Neutral perception is assumed *to be that* which is neutrally felt.**

Thus, one thinks it is *this sight* [^80] (sounds, smells…thoughts)
*that is felt*. Because of that feeling one sets upon to ‘affect’ those
sights (sounds, smells, …thoughts), sets upon to change them, modify
them, adjust them, pursue them, avoid them; one gets *entangled* in the
sights (sounds, smells…thoughts) *on account* *of what* one feels *when
they are* . Knowing that feeling is *just there-*being felt, and
perception is *just there*-being perceived, makes further entanglement
*impossible*, and any entanglement that was there[^81] is made
redundant, disowned, dropped down, never to picked up again. Why?
Because it was structurally impossible to get entangled in the first
place, but until one has fully understood that, one’s
‘not-knowing-that-one-cannot-be-entangled’ *was one’s entanglement.*
When one understands that the arisen things cannot structurally *relate*
to each other-feeling feels the feeling, perception perceives the
perception[^82] –*concern* becomes impossible or *inconceivable-dukkha*
completely ceases, never to arise again.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay9_resistance_and_designation.md">

### Resistance and Designation (Notes on DN 15)

<div class="pali">

> Nāmarūpapaccayā phasso’ti iti kho panetaṃ vuttaṃ, tadānanda,
> imināpetaṃ pariyāyena veditabbaṃ, yathā nāmarūpapaccayā phasso. Yehi,
> Ānanda, ākārehi yehi liṅgehi yehi nimittehi yehi uddesehi nāmakā-yassa
> paññatti hoti, tesu ākāresu tesu liṅgesu tesu nimittesu tesu uddesesu
> asati api nu kho rūpakāye adhivacanasamphasso paññāyethā ti?
>
> No hetaṃ, bhante.
>
> Yehi, Ānanda, ākārehi yehi liṅgehi yehi nimittehi yehi uddesehi
> rūpakāyassa paññatti hoti, tesu ākāresu tesu ākāresu tesu liṅgesu tesu
> nimittesu tesu uddesesu tesu uddesesu asati, api nu kho nāmakāye
> paṭighasamphasso paññāyethā ti?
>
> No hetaṃ, bhante.
>
> Yehi, Ānanda, ākārehi yehi liṅgehi yehi nimittehi yehi uddesehi
> nāmakāyassa ca rūpakāyassa ca paññatti hoti, tesu ākāresu tesu ākāresu
> tesu liṅgesu tesu nimittesu tesu uddesesu tesu uddesesu asati, api nu
> kho adhivacanasamphasso vā paṭighasamphasso vā paññāyethā ti?
>
> No hetaṃ, bhante.
>
> Yehi, Ānanda, ākārehi yehi liṅgehi yehi nimittehi yehi uddesehi
> nāma-rūpassa paññatti hoti, tesu ākāresu tesu ākāresu tesu liṅgesu
> tesu nimittesu tesu uddesesu tesu uddesesu asati, api nu kho phasso
> paññā-yethā ti?
>
> No hetaṃ, bhante.
>
> Tasmātihānanda, eseva hetu etaṃ nidānaṃ esa samudayo esa paccayo
> phassassa, yadidaṃ nāmarūpaṃ.

> “‘With name-&-matter as condition, contact’, so it was said: how it
> is, Ānanda, that with name-&-matter as condition there is contact
> should be seen in this manner. Those tokens, Ānanda, those marks,
> those signs, those indications by which the name-body is
> described,—they being absent, would designation-contact be manifest in
> the matter-body?
>
> -No indeed, lord.
>
> -Those tokens, Ānanda, those marks, those signs, those indications by
> which the matter-body is described,—they being absent, would
> resistance-contact be manifest in the name-body?
>
> -No indeed, lord.
>
> -Those tokens, Ānanda, those marks, those signs, those indications by
> which the name-body and the matter-body are described,—they being
> absent, would either designation-contact or resistance-contact be
> manifest?
>
> -No indeed, lord.
>
> -Those tokens, Ānanda, those marks, those signs, those indications by
> which name-&-matter is described,—they being absent, would contact be
> manifest?
>
> -No indeed, lord.
>
> -Therefore, Ānanda, just this is the reason, this is the occasion,
> this is the arising, this is the condition of contact, that is to say
> name-&-matter.”

</div>

1\. ‘Matter’ is required for ‘name’ to be present. If there would not be
that which is ‘named’, ‘name’ would not be able to arise. If on the
other hand, ‘name’ is absent, ‘matter’ would simply be inconceivable.
Thus, there is no ‘name’ without ‘matter’ and there is no ‘matter’
without ‘name’, hence-*name-&-matter*. In this way ‘name’ *designates*
the resistance, and ‘matter’ *resists* the designation. Without
‘name’(-body), there would not be any designation manifested in
‘matter’(-body), but without ‘matter’(-body), there would not be any
resistance manifested in the ‘name’(-body). It is these respective
*manifestations* of ‘designation’ and ‘resistance’ that are
*puthujjana’s* problem.

2\. With name-&-matter, he *assumes* that it is *this* ‘matter’ that is
*designated.* Through that *assumption,* designation *manifests* in that
matter body[^83]. In this way one’s ‘matter’ is *designated*-one is
*contacted*.

With name-&-matter, he *assumes* that it is *this* ‘name’ that is
*resisted.* Through that *assumption,* resistance *manifests* in that
name-body. In this way one’s ‘name’ is *resisted*-one is *contacted*.

<div class="english">

> <u>He assumes that it is \*this\* ‘matter’ that is designated.</u>
>
> He assumes it is the *same* ‘matter’ that is designated and is the
> condition for ‘name’; he assumes it is a *different* ‘matter’ that is
> designated and is the condition for ‘name’; He assumes it is
> *both-same-&-different* matter that is designated and is the condition
> for ‘name’; He assumes it is *neither-same-nor-different* ‘matter’
> that is designated and is the condition for ‘name’. Either way-the
> assumption is *there.*
>
> That which resists him he designates as the same, different,
> both-same-&-different, or neither same-nor-different, as that because
> of which ‘name’ is there. The designation *manifests* in this
> ‘matter’.[^84]
>
> Thus, he designates (*contacts*) his resistance. Contact is there.
>
> <u>He assumes that it is \*this\* ‘name’ that is resisted.</u>
>
> He assumes it is the *same* ‘name’ that is resisted and is the
> condition for ‘matter’; He assumes it is a *different* ‘name’ that is
> resisted and is the condition for ‘matter’; He assumes it is
> *both-same-&-different* ‘name’ that is resisted and is the condition
> for ‘matter’; He assumes it is *neither-same-nor-different* ‘name’
> that is resisted and is the condition for ‘matter’; Either way-the
> assumption is *there.*
>
> That which is designated he resists as the same, different,
> both-same-&-different, or neither same-nor-different, as that because
> of which ‘matter’ is there. The resistance *manifests* in this
> ‘name’.[^85]
>
> Thus, he resists (*contacts*) his designation. Contact is there.

</div>

3\. *Cf. Mūḷapariyāya Sutta*, MN 1:

<div class="pali">

> Pathaviṃ pathavito sañjānāti; pathaviṃ pathavito saññatvā pathaviṃ
> maññati, pathaviyā maññati, pathavito maññati, pathaviṃ meti maññati,
> pathaviṃ abhinandati. taṃ kissa hetu? \`apariññātaṃ tassā’ti vadāmi.

</div>

<div class="english">

> “From earth, he has a percept of earth; having had from earth a
> percept, he conceives \[that to be\] earth, he conceives \[that to
> be\] in earth, he conceives \[that to be\] out of earth, he conceives
> earth as ‘mine’, he delights earth. Why is that? He has not fully
> understood it, I say…”

</div>

What a *puthujjana* has to realise is that regardless of *what* he
perceives, it is always his *perception* that is perceived. Whether it
is ‘earth’, ‘water’, ‘fire’, ‘air’ or any other thing that MN 1
mentions, all one will ever perceive (*puthujjana* and *arahant* alike)
is one’s own perception of that ‘matter’.[^86] This is saying nothing
else than ‘matter’ is and will *always be outside* of one’s reach,
outside of that which has appeared.[^87] Perception is that which is
perceived, but perception would not be possible if there is no matter to
be perceived; on the other hand matter would be *inconceivable* if
perception was indiscernible. If one thinks “it is because of the
matter, that perception is there”, *that* thought is *perceived*, which
means that *that* which is ‘matter’ *in that thought* is also perceived.
But since it is only perception that can be perceived, that ‘matter’
which is perceived in that thought, cannot be that ‘matter’ which cannot
be perceived, since it is perceived. In this way, *from* ‘matter’, a
*puthujjana* has a percept of ‘matter’, which he *conceives* to be that
*same* ‘matter’ because of which there is a percept of matter. Or he
conceives it to be *different* ‘matter’ because of which there is a
percept of matter. Or he conceives it to be *both-same &-different*
‘matter’ because of which there is a percept of matter. Or he conceives
it to be *neither-same-nor-different* ‘matter’ because of which there is
a percept of matter. Either way ‘matter’ is *conceived.* He becomes
responsible for the *manifestation* of the conceiving of that ‘matter’,
he “makes” that ‘matter’ *exist*.[^88] That “creation” is *his-*thus it
is ‘*my*’ ‘matter’.[^89] But, since that ‘my matter’ is conceived as
that ‘matter’ *because of which* there is a percept of matter, then that
percept\[ion\] too becomes ‘*my perception*’.[^90] The same goes for
one’s feelings and intentions. They are all conceived as *mine*. Since
the *puthujjana’s* whole experience is *his*, he thinks he *himself*
*is* – the view of Self exists. [^91]

4\. When consciousness does not indicate any ‘me’ or ‘mine’, that
‘matter’ because of which there is a percept of matter, does not
manifest itself in that perception (or feeling, or intention)-it does
not manifest itself in ‘name’. Thus, in perception there is only
perception, i.e. in the seen there is only that which is seen,
namely-the seen (and so on for all the senses).[^92] One ceases to
“perceive ‘matter”’; one *knows*[^93] such a thing is impossible or
*inconceivable*,[^94] one simply *understands*[^95]: *there is* matter,
*there is* perception (or feeling, or intention), *there is*
(non-indicative) consciousness. One *understands* – there are
five”heaps”.[^96] Since one understands them, one ceases to *assume*
them. With the cessation of assumption, *that* which they were *assumed
to be*, ceases-*bhava* comes to an end.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay10_determining_determinations.md">

### Determining Determinations

1\. Feeling, perception and consciousness are always there
together.[^97] It is impossible to have them arising independently and
on their own; when there is one, the other two are present as well. They
do not pass into each other’s domain[^98]: one feels one’s feeling, one
perceives one’s perception, one cognizes one’s cognizance. Assuming that
it is the same thing that one feels, perceives and cognizes, or assuming
that it is a different thing that one feels, perceives, and cognizes, or
both-the-same-&-different thing that one feels, perceives, and cognizes,
or neither-the-same-nor-different thing that one feels, perceives, and
cognizes, means that *assumed thing* is *there-*it *exists*. One
*conceives it* through one’s feeling, one’s perception, and one’s
cognizance. One conceives that thing because of which feeling,
perception and cognizance are there, *as that thing* because of which
feeling, perception and cognizance are there. But since all one can ever
feel is one’s feeling; all one can ever perceive is one’s perception;
all one can ever cognize is one’s cognizance-*that thing* which is
conceived *as that* *because of* which feeling, perception and
cognizance are there, will *have to* *be* either *a feeling, a
perception* or *a cognizance*, and as such *cannot be that because of
which* feeling, perception and cognizance are there.[^99] By conceiving
a feeling, or a perception, or a cognizance *as that because of which*
feeling, perception and cognizance are there, one *assumes* that
feeling, or perception, or cognizance, *existing* *independently* of
feeling, perception and cognizance, *as that because of which* feeling,
perception and cognizance are there. Thus, *that because of which*
feeling, perception and cognizance *are* there, *manifests* *in that*
feeling, perception or cognizance which are *assumed \[to
be\]{.underline} that because of which* feeling, perception and
cognizance are there. Thus, *that because of which* feeling, perception
and cognizance *are* there*,* manifests in that being-it *exists*.

2\. That because of which feeling, perception and cognizance are there,
is that which is *a* *necessary condition* for feeling, perception and
cognizance that are there, because *without it*, that feeling,
perception and cognizance would *not be there*. As a necessary
condition, that because of which feeling, perception and cognizance are
there, is thus *that by which* feeling, perception and cognizance are
*determined.* But since through the assumption, *that by which* feeling,
perception and cognizance are *determined*, *manifests* *as* feeling,
perception, or cognizance *because of which* that feeling, perception
and cognizance are there, *that* feeling, perception and cognizance *are
determined \[as that by which\]{.underline}* feeling, perception and
cognizance *are determined*.[^100] Thus, through *not knowing* that one
can only feel one’s feelings, perceive one’s perception, cognize one’s
cognizance,[^101] one *determines that by which* one’s feeling,
perception and cognizance are *determined, as* a feeling, a perception
or a cognizance. Through that lack of knowledge, determinations are
manifested-*avijjāpaccayā saṅkārā.*

3\. One determines one’s determinations through assuming that because of
which determinations are there.

But that because of which determinations are there cannot be that which
is determined by those determinations, since all one can determine are
one’s determination, not *that* *because of which* those determinations
are there. Since determinations cannot determine that because of which
determinations are there, that because of which determinations are there
is that which is non-determinable-it is *undetermined*. If that because
of which the determinations are there was *to be* determined, then the
escape from determinations would not be possible.[^102]

One can know that that because of which determinations are there cannot
be determined.

Without knowing *that knowing,* one’s knowledge of that because of which
determinations are there, *determines* that because of which
determinations are there, *as that* because of which determinations are
there.[^103]

Since that because of which determinations are there *cannot
fundamentally be determined,* one’s knowledge that *determines* that
because of which determinations are there, *leads to* ‘assuming’ *that*
because of which determinations are there *as that* because of which
determinations are there.

And since that assumption is then *there*, *that* which is determined as
*that* *because* *of which* determinations are there, is *there too*,
*as that assumed* *determination* because of which determinations are
there-it is *manifested*, it *exists*.

**One can know that that because of which determinations are there
cannot be determined.**

**By knowing *that knowing*,**[^104] **one’s knowledge of that because
of which determinations are there, *does not determine* that because of
which determinations are there,**[^105] ***as that* because of which
determinations are there.**

**Since that because of which determinations are there *cannot
fundamentally be determined,***[^106] **one’s knowledge that *does not
determine* that because of which determinations are there *does not lead
to* ‘assuming’ *that* because of which determinations are there *as
that* because of which determinations are there.**

**And since that assumption is then *not there,* that which is
determined as that because of which determinations are there, is *not
there either*, *as that assumed* *determination* because of which
determinations are there-it is *not manifested,* it *does not
exist.***[^107] [^108] [^109]

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay11_notes_on_meditaion.md">

### Notes on Meditaion

<div class="{.english]:">

> 1.  Mindfulness of breathing, bhikkhus, developed and repeatedly
>     practised, is of great fruit, of great benefit; mindfulness of
>     breathing, bhikkhus, developed and repeatedly practised, perfects
>     the four foundations of mindfulness; the four foundations of
>     mindfulness, developed and repeatedly practised, perfect the seven
>     enlightenment factors; the seven enlightenment factors, developed
>     and repeatedly practised, perfect knowledge and freedom…
>
> 2.  Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest, or to the root of a
>     tree, or to an empty place, sits down; having folded his legs
>     crosswise, set his body erect, established mindfulness in front of
>     him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.
>
> 3.  Breathing in long, he knows, ‘I breathe in long’; or breathing out
>     long, he knows, ‘I breathe out long.’
>
> 4.  Breathing in short, he knows, ‘I breathe in short’; or breathing
>     out short, he knows, ‘I breathe out short.’
>
> 5.  ‘Experiencing the whole body, I shall breathe in,’ he trains
>     himself thus; ‘experiencing the whole body, I shall breathe out,’
>     he trains himself thus.
>
> 6.  ‘Calming the bodily determination, I shall breathe in,’ he trains
>     himself thus; ‘calming the bodily determination, I shall breathe
>     out,’ he trains himself thus…

</div>

> – Ānāpānasati Sutta (MN 118)

1\. The practice of ānāpānasati or mindfulness of breathing represents a
phenomenological exercise in developing the principle of simultaneity
(akālikā dhamma). This is accomplished by the sufficient establishing of
mindfulness and knowledge of what one is supposed to do and
discern.[^110] It is an exercise because it requires one actively
engaging in and being aware of the act of breathing, and it develops the
principle of simultaneity because while one is actively breathing, one
is aware of one’s actions (body, feelings, and thoughts). These are two
different, simultaneously present things: the physical or bodily act of
breathing, and the mental reflexive thoughts of one doing that very act.
One is not supposed to be favoured on account of the other; a person
should not be overdoing the breathing (i.e. turning it into a forceful
breathing exercise) nor should he be underdoing it (i.e. forgetting
about the act of breathing that is being performed, and letting it
happen unawares). In the same sense one should not overthink one’s
thinking (i.e. get lost in thought). The point is to mindfully breathe
while remaining fully aware of oneself-mindfully-breathing, or – to put
it simply – to remain aware of the present phenomenon of “I am
breathing.”

2\. Breathing is an intentional action, not a habit, and there is
volition involved in every single breath a person takes. The reason why
most people think breathing is an automated process is because they are
almost never aware of it. Thus the intentional side of the breath
remains obscured.[^111] By being an act (kamma), it has potential, if
understood as such, to reveal the nature of all acts (present, future
and past), of everything one has ever intentionally done and planning to
do. By being an intentional act, breathing shares the same universal
nature as all good and evil actions in this world. The reason why
breathing is such a suitable act for the practice of mindfulness[^112]
is because it is an immediately neutral action, there is no actual good
or bad involved in it. Thus, although it shares the same nature as all
these other more “kammically” (and consequentially) engaging acts, there
are no future results involved that would pertain to oneself and others.
The merit of an in-breath ceases with an out-breath.

3\. As we see from the opening excerpt, by “training oneself thus…,” a
monk develops mindfulness of both immediate and possible action (kamma):
“I breathe in/out (thus)…,” and “(thus) I shall breathe in/out….” This
kind of mindfulness when developed leaves nothing out, and one is
simply, yet steadily, becoming more aware of the nature of action in
general while that very action is actually present. Ultimately of
course, this leads to the full transparency of that “I”, in that
experience of breathing as a whole, and it’s utterly redundant nature
that is being gratuitously assumed.[^113] This nature, if mindfulness
pursued to the extent necessary,[^114] can eventually be completely
understood and the gratuitous “I” destroyed. This, however, should not
be taken in a sense that the phenomenon of “I” would disappear like it
was never there, but in a sense that that “I” will cease to be “me” and
“mine”. It will remain just standing there, hollow and dry.

4\. The reason why it is recommended that one should sit when exercising
mindfulness of breathing is because such a posture offers the least
distractions to one’s mind. When seated, one will not be engaging in any
other action different from breathing (and passively sitting of course).
So, the only thing that one is going to be doing is breathing. In this
way it can be understood that sitting is the most optimal posture to
have, so that one wouldn’t be wasting any effort. Consequently, with the
further development of the discernment of the simultaneously present
phenomena, and with the strengthening of mindfulness, one can more
freely assume other postures and not remain confined to sitting alone.
Furthermore, even engaging in other acts, for example: “while breathing,
I am sweeping the floor,” will not be a distraction for one’s
mindfulness in any way. In this particular instance, one’s mindfulness
and discernment is divided, or shared by, two simultaneously present
actions (sweeping and breathing), while one is also simultaneously aware
of that thing as a whole. And this division can continue as far as the
strength of one’s mindfulness allows, though there is no particular
benefit and reason in pushing it.

5\. Sometimes people assume that in ānāpānasati one is mindful of the
“body of breath,” as opposed to just one’s (experience of) body.[^115]
This rendering comes from the confusion and lack of phenomenological
insight into the nature of the (appearing) body. If one is to understand
that whether it is the ordinary experience of one’s body in everyday
existence, or an unusual one resulting from the new practice of
concentration, or even a strange sense of lightness of one’s body on
drugs, in phenomenological terms – body is just there. Thus, again,
regardless of the particular way one’s body presents itself, it is the
phenomenon of the body that is present, and that’s what one should be
concerned with. So, when practising mindfulness of breathing, one
actually devotes direct attention to the ‘act of breathing,’ that body
(or that strange-sense-of-body) that emerges as a phenomenon,
peripherally, is that which is the body, in that experience right then
and there. In this way one experiences one’s body through an act of
breathing, which is why the Buddha said that body, as one of the
foundations of mindfulness, is brought to fulfillment in the practice of
ānāpānasati.[^116]

By being able to see peripherally that which appears as peripheral, but
simultaneously present, one does not conceive it. It is the intention in
regard to the peripheral,[^117] which tends to make things actual[^118]
that carries appropriation. If one succeeds in leaving it peripheral
(i.e. the way it has arisen), one is practicing mindfulness correctly.
The tendency towards ‘conceivings’ will slowly fade when the mindfulness
reaches the necessary extent. Again, knowledge of what the conceiving is
(i.e. not understanding the phenomenon of simultaneously and dependently
present and leaving it as such), is an absolute requirement, because
without it this whole practice won’t bear fruits of any fundamental
importance. However, even a puthujjana, by trying to understand what the
correct practice of mindfulness is, might actually understand it, and
then cease to be a puthujjana, so this whole practice should be
encouraged regardless.[^119]

6\. The contemporary Buddhist outlook usually equates the practice of
ānāpānasati with the practice of jhānas, and if not regarded as the
same, it is too often thought that by practicing ānāpānasati one will by
default “enter” a jhāna. I suspect this assumption stems from the
commentarial times, whereby various meditation techniques, that revolve
around the idea of the mindfulness of breathing, were concocted and
advertised as something that would directly lead to the experience of
jhānas.[^120]

Jhānas are the establishments of mind, and as such they are to be
developed upon the sufficient degree of mindfulness, which in return can
be established upon various different things, ānāpānasati being one of
them.[^121] Thus, it should be clear, that the practice of jhāna is a
fundamentally different practice from ānāpānasati. While ānāpānasati
shares a nature of the phenomenological exercise of one’s actions in
regard to body, feelings, mind and thoughts, jhāna is less of that, but
more of an establishment of one’s mind upon a certain way of attending
to things (in this case upon a phenomenological surmounting of the
sensual domain), and the discernment involved therein. In other words,
by understanding what jhāna is, one enters it,[^122] not by performing a
set of prescribed motions that somehow make it “happen” to one.

Obviously, one can develop and establish an unwavering mindfulness
through the practice of ānāpānasati, and once established one could
change one’s outlook and with such mindfulness recognize the extent of
sensuality, as a phenomenon, and what exactly it entails, and by doing
so step outside of it, so to speak. In this way one would enter the
first jhāna, where that mindfulness would remain fully established and
can be developed even further.[^123] It is clear here that it is not
that ānāpānasati in itself took one automatically into a jhāna, but that
the change of attending to things did,[^124] once the mindfulness was
strong enough. Furthermore, jhāna is not taught as a goal in itself, as
Kāyagatāsati Sutta (MN 119) tells us, but as one of the forms that can
bring one’s mindfulness to the necessary fulfillment.

So, in order for any of these paragraphs to be intelligible, one will
have to abandon the notions of “meditation techniques” and all the
contemporary ideas of the practice of concentration, which is usually
taught at the expense of mindfulness and with underlying wrong views
(such as mystical absorptions and novelty experiences that then become a
measure of one’s “success”). When a person hears the term ānāpānasati,
he will be better o thinking “development of mindfulness” – the same
mindfulness that he has to varying extents in his day-to-day
experiences.

7\. “Meditation techniques” are usually sets of fairly random motions
and performances, idiosyncratic to the particular meditation teacher,
that require one to fol ow certain prescribed steps which if performed
correctly, and with some luck, will make one experience “something”.
Often, in return, that same teacher would have to “interpret” back these
experiences for one.

To put it bluntly: if one needs to be told by another what the
significance of one’s experience was, this means one has not understood
it by oneself. It means one is still concerned with the particular
aspects (i.e. the random contents) of one’s meditation experience, and
one fails to see the general nature of it all. As a result, any external
interpretation is regarded as an explanation, which means that
phenomenology remains buried deep down under layers of preconceived
ideas and assumptions. This holds true even more when it comes to the
idea of “attainments”, which are also regarded as experiences that
“happen” to one, almost against one’s will and as a result of “a very
good technique” one has employed. There is a concealed irony there that
escapes such people, because if one needs to be “confirmed” a sotāpanna,
for example, by one’s teacher, this means one doesn’t know that one
actually is a sotāpanna, which means that one can still doubt it, which
in return means that one is not freed from the fetter of doubt, i.e.
actually not a sotāpanna. The irony is further amplified if the teacher
goes ahead and “confirms” one. If one is to actually understand what
“being free from doubt” (and the other two fetters, characteristic of
the sotāpanna) is, one would realize how non-applicable any external
affirmation or denial is.[^125]

How obstructive to phenomenology (i.e. mindfulness) this whole way of
practising is, can be seen from the nature of understanding. One
understands things when one understands them, when the knowledge in
regard to the nature of an arisen thing is there, and not when one
successfully goes through a set of methods and observances that relies
on an almost mechanical set of motions one has to perform attentively.
Any bodily act and any act that pertains to the bodily domain (such as
the celebrated and misguided notion of “sensations”[^126] which involve
observing different parts and aspects of one’s body) is simply
irrelevant for the discerning of the nature of an arisen
phenomenon.[^127] It is misleading and obstructive, because it is
impossible to engage in a technique without the implicit belief that a
set of motions, that the chosen technique consists of, performed in a
particular mechanical order, will somehow, by itself, reveal the nature
of things. By holding this belief and faith in a technique, one will not
be trying to understand things, and by not making attempts toward the
understanding, one will definitely remain devoid of it.

One sees things correctly – as phenomena – by understanding what the
phenomenon is, and there is no technique that can make this magically
occur. Thus, the closest to what one should do in order to obtain
understanding is: trying to understand. For as long as a person is
attempting to understand and see the nature of an arisen thing, that
person might actually succeed in it, for it is certain that
understanding cannot occur in someone who is not trying to understand.
Incidentally (or not), there is never any mention of meditation
techniques in the Suttas, but ‘understanding’ and ‘discernment’, as a
way to reach the final freedom from suffering, is described and referred
to countless times.

When one looks at the experience mindfully, it becomes apparent that
regardless of the content of the particular experience, the nature of
experience is present. So, whether it is the experience of
“impatiently-waiting-for-a-bus,” or the experience of tiredness after a
physical exertion, or strange and novel experience of a powerful light
that occurred in front of me while meditating on a seven-day
technique-based meditation retreat, all I should be concerned about is
that an experience is there and as such it needs to be understood.[^128]
This means that investing effort into meditation techniques is
fundamentally a waste of time if one is concerned with understanding the
Dhamma, and the most one can accomplish is relaxation, a sense of peace
coming from withdrawal from the habitual world of senses, or – worse –
fortification of the wrong views based on a misinterpretation of the
nature of the novelty experiences. Either way, the results of any
technique one might engage in, will remain worldly, and will draw its
power from a temporary change of one’s environment, one’s usual way of
regarding things. In any case, the “benefits” and “helpfulness” of a
chosen technique will simply share the nature of a phenomenon of novelty
that one is experiencing. As such, it means it will run out, and one
will have to either do it harder, or change the technique.

If people attend meditation retreats as a form of a temporary escape
from the busy and oppressing world, by all means they should do it, as
often as they can. However, rather than engaging in a practice of a
technique and “sensation watching,” they would be better o using their
quiet time in trying to understand the nature of things according to the
way the Buddha described it, whether sitting, walking or lying down. For
it is that “nature” which the Dhamma means and refers to, and anything
that is not dealing with this, or anything that is obscuring that very
nature (i.e. phenomena) of things, consequently is not the Dhamma, no
matter how “helpful” and “useful” it might be.[^129] In different words,
one’s experience is phenomenological (i.e. the five aggregates are all
simultaneously present in their respective domains), and this means that
nature of things comes first,[^130] before anything one does based on
that nature. Doing a technique in order to practice the Dhamma (i.e. see
the nature of things) is like exiting the house, so as to be in it. It’s
a contradiction in terms.

8\. In the first establishment of mind, the first jhāna, the
appropriation of the bodily action (intention) ceases. This is
accomplished when that thought, which in ordinary experience stands for
that which is the body (and anything originating from it) is seen in its
phenomenological nature, i.e. as thought,[^131] When the mind is thus
established upon the signs and characteristics of one’s thought, as an
arisen thing, that thought is recognized as being indifferent[^132] to
anything other than itself, such as body and matter.[^133] Through that
very indifference, the thought, even if it thinks about the body and
anything bodily, ceases to stand for ‘that’ which is the body (rūpa).
This is why the first jhāna is primarily characterized by
thinking-and-pondering (vittakavicāra) and it is also why the sensual
domain (i.e. domain that is pertaining to the body) has been surmounted.
The result of this cessation is the subsiding of speech – the physical,
bodily aspect of it. By dropping the appropriation of the bodily
intention, through the surmounting of its whole domain, one clearly sees
the whole body as an independent thing, just sitting there, already
given. Even if one is to make a bodily intention, one would see that
intention too, as something that is inevitably and inseparably confined
to the bodily domain and as such: as something that can never be “mine”.
This is why the first establishment of mind is also sufficient for the
final knowledge.[^134]

Furthermore, it is because of this very principle of thought ceasing to
‘stand for’ that which is the body, that the jhānas are wholesome in
themselves, even if not accompanied by understanding. By “ceasing to
stand for” the wrong order of the experience is reversed, and the
structurally independent, simultaneously present and indifferent to each
other individual domains of the aggregates are experienced as they are,
without the distortion introduced by assumption in regard to them. This
is why the Buddha praised the practice of jhāna, because if the person
develops them correctly, even as a puthujjana, he would require very
little instruction in order to understand things and remove all
conceivings and avijjā.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay12_breathing_towards_death.md">

### Breathing Towards Death

Practising the mindfulness of breathing correctly, means practising the
mindfulness of death correctly.

The Buddha has offered mindfulness of breathing as a replacement for the
practice of mindfulness of death. That was because mindfulness of death
pushed some monks over the edge, so to speak. It made them wish for
ending of their life before being fully awakened. Yet, it is important
to note that mindfulness of breath aims at the *same* result as
mindfulness of death does. That result is dispassion towards the world
and life (of sensuality) in general. The mindfulness of breathing was a
direct response to the need for rapid dispassion of those committed to
its practice. This of course doesn’t mean that mindfulness of death was
wrong, but it means that mindfulness of breath is simply less risky. It
cannot be stressed enough though – they both aim at the same result.

Furthermore, this applies for any other “meditation” that we find in
Suttas. They might sound very different, but their aim is the same: the
establishment of mindfulness. Mindfulness to the extent necessary for
the discernment of Dhamma. Thus, we can say that if someone’s meditation
is not bringing them closer to *understanding* of sensuality and
experience of dispassion – that meditation is wrong.

The breath can end at any given moment, and we wouldn’t be able to do
anything about it. Random organ failure, heart attack, lung collapse,
none of these things would be accessible to our will power, yet, our
entire life (that same “will power”) directly and simultaneously depends
on it. For example, if something were to happen to the vital functions
of our body, our life would end that very moment. Regardless of where
our hopes and intentions were aiming at the time. This recognition can
be very unpleasant for an average inauthentic man of the world and it
could result in the experience of a tremendous fear and dread. It is the
aim of the mindfulness of death to cut through the manifold layers of
that inauthenticity. But, as the Buddha has himself seen, it can
sometimes be too much to handle; if a person realizes one’s own
mortality too fast and is not prepared for it. Hence the mindfulness of
breathing comes as a more gradual replacement. A replacement that still,
very much, leads in the same direction of recognizing the inherent
insecurity of one’s own life. This insecurity manifests through
realizing the impermanence of breath, *while* one mindfully breathes.
So, the difference between mindfulness of breath and mindfulness of
death is not in its “object”, but in a *point of view.* (or where the
mindfulness is anchored in).

In ‘death meditation’ the point of view is in one’s *sense of Self*.
This is more “personal” approach (which is why it is sharper, quicker,
and thus *riskier*). In ‘breath meditation’ the point of view is placed
on the *intentional act of breathing*. By doing so, one’s sense of Self
is not in the direct center of the experience. (as opposed to the
thought “*I* *will* die”, for example). Either way, one can realize that
no matter how volitional an act (of breathing) might be, it is
fundamentally rooted away from one’s control. (Control that is the
exemplification of one’s sense of Self.). This becomes clear when one
recognizes that *while* breathing, the body (or the lungs, or heart,
etc.) could stop working. They *could* fail. That whole dimension, where
the failure would come from, would remain entirely “inaccessible” to
one’s intentions and will. No amount of one’s volition would be able to
“cross” that threshold of control that is determined by the present body
that is simply “able to breath”. (i.e. unobstructed airways, functioning
lungs, beating heart, etc.). In simple terms: one’s sense of control,
intentions, will, sense of Self, are all bound up with presently arisen
functioning body. And the *presence* of that body is not accessible to
one’s will. (If it were so, we wouldn’t be susceptible to illness, aging
and death.). Recognition of that lack of access to the fundamental
aspects of one’s own life, is the recognition of *impermanence*. Thus,
in mindfulness of breathing, one exposes oneself to the sharp truth of
*anicca*, but without winding oneself up through the anxious
contemplation of death.

We can go as far as to say that one’s life is *completely* rooted
outside one’s own sense of control. In other words, one’s ability to
exercise will and control, is something that one has no control over.
For example: if something random, (an accident or, a disease,) were to
simply block the air passages, no amount of intentional breathing would
be able to help us. Yet, our whole life would depend on it.

Correctly discerning this, results in the *right* dispassion. And that
means having no desire for either life or death.

The reason why this is very important to see is that many people use a
mere pleasure that they derive from meditation as a criterion for their
progress. But, pleasure is secondary, and is not something an unawakened
being should use to judge things against. Pleasure is not the measure of
success, it’s the unshakeable composure of peace in the face of death,
that is. Thus, one’s meditation of breath should establish itself upon
mindfulness of the impermanence as described above. It should not become
something agreeable that one uses for not dealing with the world.

A dying man can only rely upon his wisdom, if he developed it. Wisdom is
not dependent upon any phenomenon originated upon six senses. It is
developed on the basis of the *discernment* of the same. That’s why when
one’s senses start to wither and die, the knowledge of their nature
remains unaffected. When there is no wisdom, there will be despair, in
the face of death.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay13_intentions_behind_ones_actions.md">

### Intentions Behind One’s Actions

The Right meditation is inseparable from the Right view. That means that
even if a person doesn’t have the Right view, their meditation should be
concerned about getting it. To put it simply – it comes down to
developing the self-transparency (or self-honesty) concerning skilful as
skilful (*kusala*) and unskilful as unskilful (*akusala*). The Buddha
defined the Right view in those very terms – knowing “good as good”, and
“bad as bad”. The person with the Right view knows for oneself, beyond
any doubt, *kusala* as *kusala* and *akusala* as *akusala*. By seeing it
– he recognizes it. He doesn’t need to hold or adopt any other external
criteria. The clarity of his vision pertains to here and now,
internally. Thus, for someone who hasn’t achieved that yet, that’s where
the meditation should start. Obtaining of the Right criteria and then
meditating through it. Keeping it “composed” is the definition of the
Right *samadhi*.

The problem is that this kind of instruction is very non-specific.
People today usually need something more proliferated and palpable. They
require meditation “methods”. An average man today wants a “recipe”, a
prescription of “steps”. He needs to know what *exactly* he should *do*,
that would then automatically result in his liberation. Unfortunately,
it doesn’t work like that. If we look at the Suttas, whenever the Buddha
was talking about meditation it was to bring the fulfilment of knowledge
and wisdom. Yet, if a person has none of the latter to begin with, then
the fulfilment cannot arise nor be fabricated mechanically. Very often
the Buddha’s reply on how to meditate would be in instructing people in
recognizing and avoiding the unskilful, and cultivating (*bhavana*) of
the skilful. Discerning the nature of *kusala* and *akusala* has the
potential of taking the mind above both. Freeing it from action
(*kamma*) and it’s results (*vipaka*), since they are bound to the
domain of skilful and unskilful. And that’s exactly why performing
(*doing* or *acting*) of the specific steps, cannot take one beyond the
nature of *kamma*. Understanding it however, might.

Furthermore, methods and techniques usually don’t amount to more than
management of the problem of suffering. Management of something cannot
actually uproot that very thing. So, instead of that, a person will be
better of in trying to discern what kind of attitude towards meditation
can be sustained throughout the day. An attitude that wouldn’t need any
particular favorable environment or special conditions to be applied in.
Regardless of whether one is sitting in a full lotus posture, or just
walking down the street. One needs to find that kind of *composure* that
one can maintain in both circumstances. The way to do this is if the
composure is established upon the *general mindfulness*. Not the
particular observation and adherence to the prescribed steps of a
“meditation” technique, that results in one being *absorbed* in it.
Absorption is the opposite of general mindfulness.

Every *jhana* for example is fully founded upon the basis of the
unshakeable mindfulness as number of Suttas often mention. So, even if a
person wants to do his meditation in a “formal” manner, such as sit for
an hour few times a day, that is fine. As long as it is not done for the
purpose of developing some sort of “experience of absoption” out of it.
Like trying to watch one’s breath hoping for some novelty energy
release. The point of meditation is to remain *present* as much as
possible. Present or mindful of *whatever* is **already there**
(feelings, perceptions, intentions). Not interfere with it, or deny it,
or try to replace it. Just discerning the enduring presence of the
arisen experience. Emotionally, perceptually and intentionally. That
kind of composure can then be “spread out” over one’s entire day, even
when a person is not sitting down to meditate.

And this should not be too hard to grasp (though that doesn’t mean it
will be easy to accept). The whole point of the practice of Dhamma and
meditation is nothing other than understanding of the nature of things.
The understanding that arises on account of mindful discerning of
whatever is *arisen* and *enduring* in our experience. And it’s that
understanding of the unskilful that frees the mind from it. If a person
wants to be truly free once and for all, the only way to do so is
through the knowledge and mindfulness.

Thus, if one wants to practice in a manner that pertains to this final
goal of freedom, he needs to become very mindful and honest about
intentionality behind any actions. Simple actions, more complex ones,
careless or important, big or small – actions of any kind done by body,
speech or mind. One will need to attend to them mindfully until the
motivation and intentions behind is fully seen. That is because it is
the intention that defines wholesome action as wholesome and unwholesome
as unwholesome. The “reason” for one’s action so to speak. That’s where
skilfulness of an action is rooted at. That’s also the *real* “reason”,
the one deep inside that one might not be willing to admit to oneself.
If a person is able to reach the full transparency of one’s intentional
actions and its roots, that person is a step closer in discerning what
makes *kusala* as *kusala* and *akusala* as *akusala*. That person is a
step closer to the beginning of the Right criteria or view.

So, if one needs to meditate, one needs to be concerned with one’s
actions and choices. (Which is also why *sila* or virtue comes before
the Dhamma). In such manner any motivation for one’s intentions behind
doing this or that will reveal and not taken at its face value. Through
this persistent self-questioning one can also see whether an action that
is about to be, is rooted in an unskilful motive. Like sensuality, ill
will, vanity or distraction for example. Furthermore, one would need to
abandon only *that*. The unwholesome. One doesn’t need to cancel the
entire arisen experience and behaviour. That would be a form of
overdoing it, and not using mindfulness as a criteria of discernment.
“Is what I am about to do rooted in greed? Lust? How about ill-will and
annoyance or anger?” Or “am I acting out of a desire for distraction and
forgetfulness? Am I willingly giving in to acts and desires that would
delude me further and mask the unskilful basis of those very actions?”
Such questioning about the personal and inner dimension of one’s daily
experiences and actions will *have to* result in being mindful. This is
a definition of (proper) vipassana or investigation, since that’s
exactly what’s being done. Self investigating the motivation behind any
actions. And it is obvious to see how this kind of attitude and mindful
practice would result in discerning “good as good, bad as bad”. How it
would not be dependent on any external authority or belief. Instead be a
direct, visible, universal criteria seen personally for oneself.

It’s important to note it is not necessary that one becomes neurotic or
obsessed (though it might happen) about it. Always having to *actually*
ask oneself “what am I doing?” before every action. What’s important is
the *attitude* of such *questioning*. The “answer” is already implied
within it. One already *knows* why one is acting. Whether one is aware
of it or not, that’s a different matter. Of course, until that attitude
is developed and refined, a person will have to endure possible loss of
(superficial) confidence and choice paralysis. That’s because the
implications of one’s smallest actions are becoming more revealed. A
person starts to feel responsible even for things that are not in his
control.

So through this kind of “revealing” of the roots of one’s actions, one
is simultaneously becoming less and less able to ignore one’s true
intentions. One will not be able to turn a blind eye towards acting good
while the real motivation underneath it isn’t necessarily so. That’s why
this attitude is “self-transparent”. Whatever is on the surface, one
simultaneously sees beneath it *as well*.

Consequently, one will be able to also see if something is genuinely not
rooted in greed, aversion or delusion. In such case even if the whole
world comes to tell him that that’s still “bad”, his discernment would
remain unshaken. As mentioned above, that’s because good and bad are
defined by the intention behind them. Not by the common tradition, views
and opinions, duty and culture, but by whether greed, aversion and
delusion underlies them.

It should be clear by now that the self-honesty or transparency is not
an optional thing (or just one of different ways leading to the same
goal). It’s an absolute pre-requisite for any chance of getting the
Right view and knowing how to practice the Dhamma. If a person still has
difficulties in abandoning own dependence upon a particular “method” of
practice, they can still take up this practice of self-questioning all
the time, as a “method”. Although not ideal, it will still result in
seeing through the motivation and emotional need for any methods in the
first place. (Needing “something to do”.) By seeing the subtle
motivation under *any* action, one will automatically feel responsible
for one’s choices. No matter how “justified” those might seem
externally. The weight on it is always on oneself, and that’s something
that one cannot ignore any further.

It is also then when the full weight of the Buddha’s “beings are owners
of one’s actions” saying, is truly felt.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay14_the_necessity_of_celibacy.md">

### The Necessity of Celibacy

Practice of celibacy is always beneficial. Even for a lay person, who is
not necessarily Buddhist or familiar with the Dhamma. The obvious reason
for its benefits is the inevitable increase of the mental strength that
comes with the restraint. This restraint is *intentional* and aims at a
very powerful desire that otherwise shapes and controls one’s whole
life. Sensuality/sexuality is something that heavily contributes towards
defining one’s actions and choices. It is something that has at least
some influence in virtually all of them.

Thus, adopting a practice of restraint of the sensual desire, a person
will be going against that grain of the natural sexual pull of one’s own
body. Through willingly imposing this restraint, the mind will be
pressured to grow – in terms of strength and in terms of enduring of
itself. (As the case with any strength development is. Gradually
increasing resistance, increases the capacity to hold the very same.)

Sometimes people think that not having sexual intercourse is all that
being celibate means. That doesn’t constitute the celibacy we are
talking about here. The difference is to not be celibate *only* because
the current circumstances are presenting no options, but to actually be
celibate as a result of *determination* and *practice of restraint*.
(And then one might decide to live in the circumstance that present no
options, and that’s fine.) It’s important to not misunderstand this. We
are not saying that one somehow needs to be *tempting* oneself with
sensuality. “Flirting” with it, so to speak, to keep reinforcing the
practice of saying “no” to it. That’s ridiculous. And completely
misguided and countering the right efforts. Flirting with sensuality can
only be done out of *sensuality*. (As the Buddha said, it’s not possible
to have sensual perception without the mind being bound by sensuality.)
So, tempting oneself with sensuality, it’s already a form of engaging
*with* sensuality. As such, it goes against the practice of the celibate
determinations.

<div class="english">

> “Firstly, a man who claims to be perfectly celibate does not mutually
> engage in sex with a woman. However, they consent to being anointed,
> massaged, bathed, and rubbed by a woman. They enjoy it and like it and
> find it satisfying. This is a corruption, flaw, blemish, or taint in
> celibacy. This is called one who lives the celibate life impurely,
> tied to the fetter of sex. They’re not freed from rebirth, old age,
> death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and distress. They’re not
> freed from suffering, I say.
>
> Furthermore, a man who claims to be perfectly celibate does not
> mutually engage in sex with a woman. Nor do they consent to massage
> and bathing. However, they laugh and play and have fun with women.
>
> they gaze into a woman’s eyes;
>
> they listen through a wall or rampart to the sound of women laughing
> or chatting or singing or crying.
>
> they recall when they used to laugh, chat, and have fun with women;
>
> they see a householder or their child amusing themselves, supplied and
> provided with the five kinds of sensual pleasures;
>
> They don’t see a householder or their child amusing themselves,
> supplied and provided with the five kinds of sensual pleasures.
> However, they live the celibate life wishing to be reborn in one of
> the orders of gods. They think: ‘By this precept or observance or
> mortification or spiritual life, may I become one of the gods!’ They
> enjoy it and like it and find it satisfying. This is a corruption,
> flaw, blemish, or taint in celibacy. This is called one who lives the
> celibate life impurely, tied to the fetter of sex. They’re not free
> from rebirth, old age, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, sadness, and
> distress. They’re not free from suffering, I say.
>
> As long as I saw that these seven sexual fetters—or even one of
> them—had not been given up in me, I didn’t announce my supreme perfect
> awakening in this world with its gods, Maras and Brahmas, this
> population with its ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans.
>
> But when I saw that these seven sexual fetters—every one of them—had
> been given up in me, I announced my supreme perfect awakening in this
> world with its gods, Maras and Brahmas, this population with its
> ascetics and brahmins, its gods and humans. Knowledge and vision arose
> in me: ‘My freedom is unshakable; this is my last rebirth; now there
> are no more future lives.’”

</div>

> – Anguttara Nikaya, 7.50

So, it’s this determination, the decision to not engage with sensuality
ever again that makes all the difference. Just like when a person is
trying to give up smoking for example. It will be much harder to do so
if you bring yourself up to decide to *never* smoke again, as opposed to
deciding it to quit it half-heartedly for a month or so. The former
would exert much more pressure on an individual and even someone who was
not a heavy, but a casual, smoker would feel the whole weight of it. And
this is even more true of celibacy. And it is necessary to determine it
in such a decisive manner.

Only then the mind will be pushed towards development (provided it
doesn’t break) of strength on that corresponding level. Anything short
of it, the mind will just tread water until the pressure of sexuality
builds up, and then inevitably give in. Determining it decisively,
however, means that person’s entire life will have to be affected by the
profound shift in significance of ordinary things in day to day life.
This is pretty much the main reason why most of the people would be
afraid of doing it.

As hard as it might seem, it is still very much possible to succeed with
a persistent effort over a period of time. If one modifies one’s
environment to support the restraint and to not add more to the already
existing pressure, the mind can eventually become dry of the inherent
“wetness” of the desires. Then everything in person’s life that was
depending on the acts of sensuality and non-restraint, will also “dry
out”. A person would be free from it. This refers to the inherent
worries of protecting what one has acquired, pains of craving towards
what one doesn’t have yet, obstacles of one’s worldly ambitions, and
similar. All these things will have no significance any more. They will
not be able to cause one to suffer on account of them.

It is also important to mention that the *sooner* one starts this
practice the better. It is not uncommon for people to think that they
have time to get older and pursue sexual and sensual desires. And that
then afterwards, they can practice restraint and free themselves from
desires. Unfortunately, it’s quite the opposite: the longer one waits
the harder it will be to *discern* sensuality and do something about it.
With old age, sexuality goes “underground” so to speak. The time comes
when the body loses its vigour and the sexuality won’t manifest any more
in a form of obvious physical behaviour and thirst. This can mislead a
person to believe that they are free from it. What actually happened was
that sexuality has now descended from something that was discernible
(bodily actions and thoughts of such) to something that’s virtually
invisible. A subtle *background* that becomes a ubiquitous motivation
for all sorts of habits, acts and even psychological needs. They
wouldn’t carry the sensual flavour to them anymore. A flavour that used
to be very clear on the surface of them at all. If the mind hasn’t made
the effort, while the aim of the effort was obvious, it won’t be able to
do it now. Of course, it is still possible in theory at least. But, when
the strength and determination fade with the body, having been left
undeveloped for so long, it is very unlikely that that will change. (The
Suttas, though, do list few exceptions of very old people reaching
arahantship. But those were rare, which is why they were so clearly
remembered.)

Thus, the sooner the better. That’s also why many people in time of the
Buddha were inspired to see young monks and nuns in *prime* of their
life. Meaning: they were at the time of their lives when sensuality was
still available and easy to get. They have not just given it up, but
ended up *enjoying* the practise of restraint and understanding the
Dhamma.

<div class="english">

> “Then that devata said to the Venerable Samiddhi:”You have gone forth
> while young, bhikkhu, a lad with black hair, endowed with the blessing
> of youth and strength, in the prime of life, without having dallied
> with sensual pleasures. Enjoy human sensual pleasures, bhikkhu; do not
> abandon what is directly visible in order to pursue what takes time.”
>
> “I have not abandoned what is directly visible, friend, in order to
> pursue what takes time. I have abandoned what takes time in order to
> pursue what is directly visible. For the Blessed One, friend, has
> stated that sensual pleasures are time-consuming, full of suffering,
> full of despair, and the danger in them is still greater, while this
> Dhamma is directly visible, immediate, inviting one to come and see,
> applicable, to be personally experienced by the wise.”

</div>

> — SN 1.20

We must stress here that practice of sense restraint would be beneficial
even to those who have no interest in practising the Dhamma – fully or
partially. Because if the mind manages to become stronger than the
sensual pull, and learns how to go beyond sensual cravings, it will to a
great degree go beyond the burdens that come with the sensuality.
Burdens that are otherwise unavoidable and bring much worry and
suffering. Going beyond sensuality will also lessen the grip of one’s
own Ego and all the conceit underlying it would be reduced. The
anxieties, lack of satisfaction, guilt over things done in the past –
all of that would disappear or be significantly removed. Of course, we
can only imagine what greater freedom can be gained, if on top of the
steadfast restraint, one also practices the Dhamma instructions towards
uprooting even the subtle conceit and cravings.

The entire life of a person most often revolves around following
desires. Trying to get what one wants is the most fundamental habit of a
human mind. This is quite normal, but the problem is in that *what*
people want is almost always rooted in sensuality. One’s desires are
most often aimed at the pursuit of the pleasures gained through physical
senses. Pleasant sights, sounds, tastes, smells and touches. Subtle or
coarse. If a man begins to learn how to go against this *sensual*
“*grain*” that exhorts pressure on him, that will already mean a
beginning of strength. Of course, mere resistance to such sensual
cravings will not be able to uproot the sensuality in itself. For that,
*understanding* of the nature of that sensuality will be necessary. But
this is only possible on the basis of the sense restraint. For example,
if a person has been adhering to the practice of restraint and
abstaining from *intentionally* giving in to sense desires, that person
will be able to see the gratuitous nature of the sensual desire in a
form of one’s own thoughts. It is something that has arisen completely
uninvited, yet pressures one to act upon it as if it is truly owned by
him. Sticking to this kind of reflection can reveal that even things
that one does want and desire, are rooted and arisen as something that
is fundamentally outside of one’s control. One’s responsibility lies not
in preventing those thoughts from arising, but in choosing to *delight*
and *entertain* them. Or not, as the Buddha would tell. In brief: being
able to see the uncontrollable (gratuitous) nature of one’s own desires,
one can overcome the pressure that they exhort on him.

The main reason why most people wouldn’t even consider the practice of
celibacy is because it’s simply too difficult. Because of that it is
also unlikely that a man would choose to do it, outside of some sort of
philosophical belief or a religious practice. There just wouldn’t be
enough motivation.

To reiterate: freedom from sensuality starts by giving it up first.
Saying “no” to it. That is not optional. This initial effort can then
enable a person to allow the nature of desire to *manifest* and *arise*.
As opposed to someone who tries to prevent this, or rather cover it up.
This cover up is due to instantaneous giving in to the pressure of
desire (if not physically, at least mentally). Or it is due to trying to
prevent it and deny it. (The former and the latter correspond to sensual
indulgence and self-mortification respectively.)

Giving in to the pressure, distracts one from seeing what is it that
pressures him in the first place. Denying it, does the same. If one
*learns* how to endure it through restraint, then it can become clear
that there is no pressure of sensuality *without* one’s body. A person
at a face value regards one’s own body as basis for pleasure. It’s seen
to be something “free” and “effortless”. Something that belongs to “me”.
That in itself is a sufficient reason for giving in to it. Hence, it’s
not incidental that the Buddha often compared sensuality to a “bait”.

If one contemplates the necessity of the living healthy body for *any*
sensual engagements (fleeting or otherwise), it can be discerned that
even the pleasures that one can gain from it *belong* to the actual
*sense organs*. As in: pleasures are inseparable and inconceivable
without them. Thus, if one wants to overcome the entire domain of
sensuality, one can do so by overcoming the *ownership* of the sense
organs (or the *body* as a whole). And extinguishing of the ownership,
i.e. the necessary condition of sensuality, is done by understanding
that it was impossible to own the body in the first place. If that were
not so, then one’s desires would *already* be all satisfied (i.e. there
would be no desires to begin with). Alternatively, one can contemplate
that if one were the true master and owner of one’s own body, that body
would not be a *subject* to illness, aging and death. It would not be
*liable* to accidents, elements, circumstances, etc. This kind of
understanding can only be properly developed on the basis of restraint
and celibacy. And once it is developed, then the restraint will become a
normal mode of behaviour. It will not be a way of “resistance” to the
sensual pull any more, because there will be no more senses that can
pull one. Senses and their respective desires are a problem only when
they are “mine”.

</div>

<div id="nyanamoli_essay15_peripheral_awareness.md">

### Peripheral Awareness

Mindfulness done correctly is when the mind is *anchored* in something.
That something must be a thing that is not directly attended to, but
instead, has to be a *reference point* to the attended thing (hence we
call it “anchor”). If a thing is not directly attended to but there, we
call that thing to be a “background”. It’s a background to a thing we
attend (which makes that thing a “foreground”). This is the basic
principle of mindfulness, on which we can expand here below.

One begins developing this practice of awareness by being mindful of the
experience as a *whole*. For example, one is mindful of
‘being-seated-on-a-chair-reading-a-Dhamma-essay’. That is one’s
*situation* at that very time. That is one’s experience as a “whole”.
This is always the necessary starting point. What is very important is
to prevent the tendency to become absorbed in one particular thing.
(Feeling, sensations or perception, and similar). Instead, one has to
broaden the mindfulness and become aware of the *generality* of one’s
current situation, without losing the sight of the particular
either.[^135]

Of course, the attempts of discerning the background of one’s current
experience will not be perfect in the beginning. One will more often
than not fall into a mistake of over-attending one’s experience as a
whole. This is a mistake of making that background into an *object* of
one’s attention, defining it, clarifying it, trying to keep it in front.
These are all ways of making it a *foreground*, which means that then
something else will be in place of the background.

The natural tendency is to ask “*What* is then the background?”. This is
however a wrong question. And it’s wrong because we are not concerned
with the *content* of the background (or foreground for that matter),
which would be the answer to “what?”. Instead our concern should be with
*nature* of it. So one needs to restrain the tendency to clarify *what*
is that “background”, and learn how to start discerning the domain of
it. The domain of the “*periphery*”, its nature, in regard to what is
presently *enduring* here.

Thus, something one attends to directly is what a foreground is at the
time. It can be anything that is the current object of one’s attention.
That thing has manifested, and it is enduring as such. That’s the basic
structural property of one’s experience, there is no problem with this.
However, if one wants to develop mindfulness, a step further is
necessary. That step is developing the peripheral “vision” in regard to
that very same foreground object, but *without* making that peripheral
vision the new object by *directly* attending to it. The Buddha referred
to this as “*yoniso manasikara*”, which is often translated as “proper
attention”. *Yoniso manasikara* is the correct way of attending to the
peripheral. *Manasikara* means “attention”. *Yoni* means “womb”. So when
a thing is present in the front, in the foreground, its peripheral
background is that very “womb” the thing has “came from”, so to speak.
*Yoniso manasikara* is womb-attention, or less literally: a peripheral
attention.[^136]

Thus, the point is to learn *how* to attend. Not so much “what”. It’s
about discerning the habit of “over-attending” and learning how to not
resort to it. This habit manifests through either indulging or resisting
the object of one’s attention. Either way, one is fully concerned with
it. This is why one must stop trying to “observe” one’s experience as an
object of one’s attention and instead, acknowledge it and let it
*endure* on its own. (Let it persist or
change-while-remaining-the-same-thing). Once the arisen experience of
one’s attention is allowed to be, then gradually and indirectly,
discerning of the peripheral *domain* can manifest.

The most practical way of practising this is through mindfulness of body
postures. That’s why these things are often called “foundations” of
mindfulness, or “anchors” or “reference points”. It’s because they are
*always* rooted in the *background*. (E.g. foundations are *under*; an
anchor is at the *bottom*; the reference point is at the *distance*.
Under, bottom, away… it means ‘not-here-directly-in-front-of-me’). So
for example: while I’m seated, I’m reading an article, actively
scrolling through the pages, paying attention to what’s being said in
it. Things I’m “doing”, like reading, writing, talking, etc. are things
I’m attending to (foreground). And I’m attending to them all *while* I’m
*seated*. That’s the reference point that is enough for proper
mindfulness. That is what’s the background here. Yet, if I switch my
attention and start attending to the fact that I’m sitting on the chair,
then the body posture of “sitting” ceases to be the background in my
experience. Why? Because I’ve broken the relationship of “referencing”.
There is no more “*while*”, since I forgot about the reading, and became
concerned with sitting. When this happens, one can either go back to the
original foreground, or discern the newly present background in regard
to the attended experience of sitting. The new background will have to
be something even more *general* than “sitting posture”. And the more
general thing in that case is nothing other than awareness of the “body
there”.[^137]

Body postures are more general than attending to a particular action or
perception. But having a “body *there*” is even more general than the
postures. Because to be walking, sitting, standing or lying down, one
needs to have a *body* in the first place. That’s why one can also use
the knowledge of “there is body”, as the peripheral anchor for one’s
daily actions and experiences. The presence of one’s living body is a
fundamental requirement for *any* action. We can go even higher (even
more general), as we mentioned earlier, and develop awareness of the
phenomenon of Earth, Water, Fire or Air. Or even further, in the
practice of more refined *kasinas*, as described in the *Suttas*. The
point is that the principle remains the same.

We need to stress that this is something that requires *development*.
It’s not something that can be just “figured out”, or read once and made
sense of. It requires a diligent *repetition* of “stepping back” when
over-attending one’s experience as a whole. And then “stepping in” when
ignoring it (under-attending it, forgetting about the background). So,
it takes time and effort in order for it to be correctly *discerned* and
*recognized*.

The problem with common practice of meditation is that people are
encouraged to get “absorbed” into the particular “meditation object”.
The practice becomes a form of focusing on the foreground at the expense
of everything else. And not just that, people end up focusing on the
objects twice as hard. This is because their view of meditation is to
look and *perceive* the “momentary” foreground (the whole idea of
“observing ‘*sensations*’”). Then within that they try to perceive even
more *particular* things. So it’s not just the *domain* of the
foreground, but the content proliferates further too. In cases like
this, the ‘background’, as a foundation of mindfulness that needs to be
understood, is even further obscured.

The ‘reference point’ means being aware of something, without having to
actively think about it. That’s the basic principle of mindfulness. This
should *always* be the basis for *samadhi* (according to the
*Suttas*).[^138] That is why, if mindfulness and awareness is practised
correctly, it will result in *knowledge* of the nature of things. The
very definition of knowledge is knowing something without having to
actively think about it. The knowledge reappears when it is attended to.
One knows what one knows. This is the important point because this type
of mindfulness of the background that’s simultaneous with the presently
arisen phenomenon[^139], results in the establishment of mind
(*samadhi*) that transcends *sensuality* and *ill will*. The whole
domain (scope) of unwholesome.[^140] And that’s why that *samadhi*
further results in complete knowledge of liberation.

The catch is in persistent effort of repetition of *learning* how to
*attend* to things *peripherally*, without having to “directly” look at
them. For a mind affected with *avijja*, the “direct look”, the
“*ayoniso manasikara*” always involves *appropriation* and the
*Self-view*. And “learning to attend” things peripherally can be done on
many different “bases” or “domains” that are structurally present as the
background of our attended experience. These domains are the domain of
feelings, thoughts, and even one’s intentions (bodily, verbal and
mental).

For example, being aware of the *general feeling* present, without
trying to *perceive* it as “sensation” (i.e. “in” the body), is another
way of establishing the proper mindfulness.

Or, something we often talk about, taking up of personal
*responsibility*. If one takes it up, then no matter what the engagement
with the particular task is, the background of it (the “womb” of that
engagement) is one’s own *choice* to engage with it in the first place.
Taking up responsibility, means becoming aware of the “background”
choices one makes throughout one’s life.[^141]

Furthermore, taking up responsibility for what one has chosen, a person
gets to maintain that mindfulness through the very particular actions
one is doing on account of it. And that mindfulness of responsibility is
not something they would have to perpetually think about. No, that
mindfulness is being *felt* instead. (That’s why the initial awareness
of *any* form of responsibility is always *unpleasant* and concerning).

The choice behind one’s actions is a general *unity*, a *context* of
one’s acts, that is present in each of those acts individually. Present
as a peripheral background. It is because of this that *sila* or
*virtue* is a necessary prerequisite for understanding. When one’s
actions are based on *distortions* of priority (particular sensuality
*over* general nature of choice regarding it, for example), one cannot
see a clear responsible background while engaged in such pursuits. No
perspective, so to speak. So, first actions that maintain absorptions
with particularity must be divorced from the unwholesome domain. Then
they must be further restrained, by avoiding the distracting of oneself.
By undoing wrong way of attending to things. By not cultivating improper
attention. Only then can one begin to discern the *signs* of the
peripheral, characteristics of the background hereby discussed. Only
then one will be able to “grasp the sign of one’s mind” or
*cittanimitta*. A necessary requirement for the arising of the Right
view.

</div>

<div id="essays_by_thaniyo_thero.md">

## Essays by Thaniyo Thero

</div>

<div id="thaniyo_essay1_meaning_of_the_heart.md">

### Meaning of the Heart

<div class="english">

> “What, friends, is the earth element? The earth element may be either
> internal or external. What is the internal earth element? Whatever
> internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and
> appropriated; that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin,
> flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm,
> spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, contents of the stomach, feces,
> or whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is solid,
> solidified, and appropriated: this is called the internal earth
> element. Now both the internal earth element and the external earth
> element are simply earth element. And that should be seen as it
> actually is with proper wisdom thus: ‘This is not mine, this I am not,
> this is not my self.’ When one sees it thus as it actually is with
> proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and
> makes the mind dispassionate toward the earth element.\\”Now there
> comes a time when the water element is disturbed and then the external
> earth element vanishes. When even this external earth element, great
> as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction,
> disappearance, and changeˌ what of this body, which is appropriated by
> craving and lasts but a while? There can be no consideration of that
> as ‘I’ or ‘mine’ or ‘I am.’ ”

</div>

> – [MN 28](https://suttacentral.net/mn28)

Bring your attention to your heart. It’s situated almost at the centre
of your torso, to the left just under the rib cage. Sense its movements.
Notice the beat, the rhythm, the muscular throb, the squish and pump of
blood.

If that piece of moving flesh were to stop or miss a beat, your
breathing would stop, you would pass out and away or you might just have
a tiny stroke, leaving you handicapped for many years to come. Your life
would change, either a little or a lot. Your plans for tomorrow would
cease, your skills would mean nothing, your lifestyle would be affected.
Your family or friends and your deepest prayers will not make that piece
of flesh in your chest keep working if it just stops. The heart cannot
hear you, it is not aware of your intentions, your missions, your loves
or hates. It just pumps blood…not for you or even itself, it just pumps
blood. It doesn’t have a personality, it is not personally invested in
anything that you do. It is an impersonal piece of flesh which your life
is directly and structurally, dependent on.

The heart organ in your chest is inaccessible to you. Even if you were,
through the marvels of modern medical science, able to physically open
up your chest and not bleed to death, you would still find a heart organ
which you would have no internal access to. You could touch it, but you
cannot create it or control it directly. Which means that you can affect
it only secondarily, but you cannot choose the heart’s rhythm and beat
to determine your life status or not, it does so whether you like it or
not. It determines your life, and without it, your choices cannot occur.

Attend to the heart, really get a good overall sense of its movement and
weight….and now with full intent, choose for it to stop beating.

What you will discover is that you are “outside” of it, even though you
would say that it is inside of you. That core of your personal body is
inaccessible to you, it is not yours to control, it is not you. Your
overall sense of body is undermined by a thing which is not yours and
which it relies upon for its life. Such a REVEALation highlights this
gratuitous assumption that “the body is mine, or is my-self”. It reveals
a contradiction, you assume the body to be yours, yet it is anything but
yours. You realise, “My whole sense of self is situated on top of, or
undermined by organs which do not belong to me or to anyone else
anywhere.”

<div class="english">

> “I don’t belong to anyone anywhere. And nothing belongs to me
> anywhere.” By often practicing and living in this way, their mind
> becomes confident in that dimension. Being confident, they either
> attain the dimension of nothingness now, or are freed by wisdom.”

</div>

> – [MN 106](https://suttacentral.net/mn106)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="english">

Sense of self can only exist, if there is something being taken as self.
However, if it turns out that that which one takes as self, is in fact
not belonging to me, then that self has no legs to stand on, so to
speak. It slowly falls apart, it fades away, because it needs
*something* to assume to be itself. Something accessible, something
mine. Yet there is no-thing here that we can find as such.

> “Bhikkhus, that assumption(of ownership, of self ) is neither the same
> as these five aggregates subject to assumption, nor is the assumption
> something apart from the five aggregates subject to assumption. But
> rather, the desire and lust for them, that is the assumption there.”

</div>

> – [SN 22.82](https://suttacentral.net/sn22.82)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your life is dependent on that heart. You can pay attention to what you
are doing whether walking, sitting, thinking, writing, making coffee,
etc. However, at the back of your mind you should remember and keep
reminding yourself of the meaning of that presently enduring heart
beating in your chest. As you go about your day, as you act towards
various things that occupy your attention (the foreground), remember
that there in the background is a heart which is determining your
activities. Once that situation becomes clearer, try to understand what
it *means*.

You could also try and pay attention to the beating heart directly, but
still try to discern its meaning peripherally, in the background.
Meaning of non-ownership and inaccessibility. You can also discern in
the background the rest of your body, your mood, thoughts, intentions,
desires, and notice just how dependent it all is on this heart here
beating that I am attending to, and just how dependent this heart here
is on those things working well for it to be. Let the meaning of that
reveal itself, i.e notice what that situation of “yourlife actions being
determined by this living, fleshy organ” means. Start to discern the
dangerous position that you are in. In other words, discern the
*paticcasamuppada* principle - with my heart beating, my life is; when
there is my life, there is my heart beating…….

<div class="english">

> “Bhikkhus, do you see: ‘This’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”—“Bhikkhus, do
> you see: ‘This manifests with that as a nutriment’?”—“Yes, venerable
> sir.”—“Bhikkhus, do you see: ‘With the cessation of that nutriment,
> what has come to be is subject to cessation’?”—“Yes, venerable sir.”

</div>

> – [MN 38](https://suttacentral.net/mn38)

<div class="english">

> “And which is the noble method which is properly seen by him \[i.e.
> the noble disciple\], properly penetrated with understanding? Here,
> householder, a noble disciple attends properly, with perspective on
> the source, to this very dependent origination:
>
> When there is this, there is this.  
> When there isn’t this, there isn’t this.  
> When this arises, this arises.  
> When this ceases, this ceases.”

</div>

> – [SN 12.41](https://suttacentral.net/sn12.41)

or

While keeping that situation in mind, seeing in that “simultaneously
dependent principle” way. Reflect how that beating heart here can stop
now, or…now or maybe later…and so on. Try to discern the meaning of
that. Meaning of being liable to death. -
[*Marananussati*](https://suttacentral.net/an6.19)

or

Expand your awareness to other parts of the body which you also do not
have ownership over. The brain, intestines, veins, lungs, muscles, etc.
Discern the meaning of that. That this body, all its parts, are all
dependent on each other, and your gratuitous ownership of them is not
even a requirement for them to continue their mindless task of being
bodily organs. - [*Paṭikūlamanasikāra*](https://suttacentral.net/dn22)
[*(32parts meditation)*](https://suttacentral.net/kp3)

or

Breathe in long and short and so on, while at the back of your mind
knowing the heart, the body, the feelings, the intention, the choice to
breathe in long and short, all enduring there simultaneously dependent…
all being inaccessible to your desires of ownership. Even, despite being
able to manipulate the breath, the bodily-intention to breathe is not
your own. Develop those discernments, uncover their meaning more and
more. See the phenomena of *anicca-dukkha-anatta* and make that clear as
day. - [*Anapanasati*](https://suttacentral.net/mn118).

Such contemplations into the nature of your existence and your
attachments, will most likely unnerve you at first, but if you are
accomplished in precepts and sense restraint, then you won’t have
anxiety that will overwhelm you when you repeatedly see this and not
turn away from the unpleasant truth that says, “your very self is not
your own”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pay attention to the heart again. Where does its energy come from? Do
you have access to that? You can of course imagine or make up some story
about where the energy or *life forc*e comes from, but that would only
be done because you cannot sit with the fact that you don’t know where
it comes from. That uncertainty reveals the deeper meaning of your
situation, which in turn makes you feel very uncomfortable, and so you
try to get rid of that discomfort by telling yourself a story to make
yourself feel better about your existence which is not your own.

What if that *energy* stops? Then the heart will stop moving. The heart
then is also not its own. It too is dependent upon that which it is not
in its control. And so if I do not even have access to the heart organ
in this body, what is to say about that which the heart depends on?

That energy, the activation, the life force, one could call
consciousness, the animaton of things, the presence of things. That
energy is not known without that which is energised, such as the heart.
I couldn’t know about the “heart energy” if there was no moving fleshy
piece of meat. I can try to fantasise about the origin of that energy
and call it god, biology, or whatever else, but that would just be
another assumption used to cover up the reality that that particular
energy is completely inaccessible to me while I am intimately dependent
upon it. Both the fleshy heart and its *energy* do not know me, they are
both not mine, not my friend or enemy. They are both there, doing what
they do, when both are there.

<div class="english">

> “Now tell me, friend Sāriputta: Is name-&-form self-made or other-made
> or both self-made & other-made, or—without self-making or
> other-making—does it arise spontaneously?”
>
> “It’s not the case, Koṭṭhita my friend, that name-&-form is self-made,
> that it is other-made, that it is both self-made & other-made, or
> that—without self-making or other-making—it arises spontaneously.
> However, from consciousness as a requisite condition comes
> name-&-form.”
>
> “Now tell me, friend Sāriputta: Is consciousness self-made or
> other-made or both self-made & other-made, or—without self-making or
> other-making, does it arise spontaneously?”
>
> “It’s not the case, Koṭṭhita my friend, that consciousness is
> self-made, that it is other-made, that it is both self-made &
> other-made, or that—without self-making or other-making—it arises
> spontaneously. However, from name-&-form as a requisite condition
> comes consciousness.”
>
> “….Now how is the meaning of these statements to be understood?”
>
> “Very well then, Koṭṭhita my friend, I will give you an analogy; for
> there are cases where it is through the use of an analogy that
> intelligent people can understand the meaning of what is being said.
> It is as if two sheaves of reeds were to stand leaning against one
> another. In the same way, from name-&-form as a requisite condition
> comes consciousness, from consciousness as a requisite condition comes
> name-&-form. From name & form as a requisite condition come the six
> sense media. From the six sense media as a requisite condition comes
> contact. From contact as a requisite condition comes feeling. From
> feeling as a requisite condition comes craving. From craving as a
> requisite condition comes clinging/sustenance. From
> clinging/sustenance as a requisite condition comes becoming. From
> becoming as a requisite condition comes birth. From birth as a
> requisite condition, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
> distress, & despair come into play. Such is the origination of this
> entire mass of suffering & stress.
>
> “If one were to pull away one of those sheaves of reeds, the other
> would fall; if one were to pull away the other, the first one would
> fall. In the same way, from the cessation of name-&-form comes the
> cessation of consciousness, from the cessation of consciousness comes
> the cessation of name-&-form. From the cessation of name-&-form comes
> the cessation of the six sense media. From the cessation of the six
> sense media comes the cessation of contact. From the cessation of
> contact comes the cessation of feeling. From the cessation of feeling
> comes the cessation of craving. From the cessation of craving comes
> the cessation of clinging/sustenance. From the cessation of
> clinging/sustenance comes the cessation of becoming. From the
> cessation of becoming comes the cessation of birth. From the cessation
> of birth, then aging-&-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, distress, &
> despair all cease. Such is the cessation of this entire mass of
> suffering & stress.”

</div>

> – [SN 12.67](https://www.dhammatalks.org/suttas/SN/SN12_67.html)

That *energy* which the body depends on, is itself dependent on the body
being available. Neither aspect of this situation as a whole can be seen
or known as independently arisen, and any independence is a complete
fantasy on my part, an assumption on account of the pressuring ambiguity
of my existence which is not in my control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Take for example a computer game which can have a third person view of
some character, walking in the bottom centre of the screen. That in a
way, is how one should try and view one’s first person viewpoint, such a
viewpoint would be a right type of viewing. A way of seeing and knowing
this situation that you are framed by. In life, you can see other
people, over there or near you, and they are not what you think you are.
They are others who are “over there”, and likewise is your body to
others, the same way their bodies are to you - “an other over there”. No
matter how close they appear. Your body is on the same plain of the
other bodies you do not own. Your body is equally not owned by you.

If I can take this body which happens to be very close to this point of
view, as for me, or belonging to me, as self, I can also take other
bodies and things which are a little bit further away, like cars, house,
wife, child, cattle, wealth, country, and so on, i.e my sense of
ownership, my self has no limits, it can take everything personally. If
I can assume that a part of this nama-rupa domain, which is not-mine, as
mine, then I can assume any part of that domain to be mine or for me.

Take, again the example of a computer game, where you’re playing a
character. That game is dependent upon electricity. When there is no
electricity there is no game. The electricity helps to animate the game,
it is not the game, yet is essential to it. These computer games can be
played from a first person point of view, whereby you just see the arms
and legs, etc. Such a point of view is the way we view the world, but it
would be useful to try and view our first person point of view in a
third person point of view manner, an ability to self-reflect, to
mentally step back and be aware of the situation as a whole while we go
about our day. However, unlike the game that we are outside of, this
life, we are inside of, we are inside as the assumption of ownership. We
are not outside. Our assumption of self cannot be found anywhere else
except here, surrounded by the situation as a whole. We only know this
which we are completely surrounded by, and to think that there is
outside of this or that we are enclosed and separated from a greater
external reality which is beyond this, means that we are assuming a
reality, we are imagining a reality which cannot be known and thus
living in delusion. The reality that we are imagining beyond *this* is
nowhere else to be found except here as an assumption in regard to this
situation and its components.

Therefore, this sense of self, being second to the situation as a whole,
being *dependent upon* an assumption of ownership in regard to this
situation as a whole, is *unownable*. It is dependently manifested, not
self-manifested . It depends on there being a situation as a whole,
operating, on its own. My self, then, is not my own because the things
which my self depends on for its existence, *cannot* be my own.

Sense the rhythm of the heart throughout your day, tune into its meaning
of *anicca-dukkha-anatta*, and let your *Self* fall apart.

</div>

<div id="thaniyo_essay2_uproot_assumptions_uproot_suffering.md">

### Uproot Assumptions, Uproot Suffering

<div class="english">

> “And what is ‘assumption’? There are these four kinds of assumptions.
> The assumption of sensual pleasures, the assumption of views, the
> assumption regarding the adherence to precepts and duties *(i.e,
> practices thought to be able to cure or free you from suffering but
> only manage it)*, and the assumption of self-identity. This is called
> assumption.”

</div>

> – SN 12.2

<u>Bodily pain and mental suffering</u>

Having a body means that one will experience pleasure and pain but that
does not mean that the mind is bound to be emotionally affected, as in,
the various forms of joy or misery that appear simultaneously with what
is felt, are gratuitously arisen, they are not what a feeling is but are
consequences of assuming what a feeling is, and so to bring an end to
that emotional suffering, one has to remove that assumption.

Not knowing that there is an assumption regarding a feeling, one
delights in or resists it, and to that extent, depending on the
intensity of the feeling, a corresponding emotion is also present. When
the assumption is removed, then no matter the intensity of the feeling,
no emotional suffering is possible.

The gratuitous assumption is that a feeling is “for me, mine, and
myself”. That assumption cannot easily be removed by merely believing
that whatever is felt is not mine. Even though the belief is accurate,
that nature of feeling not being mine needs to be clarified through
repeated contemplation and real-life application by way of not acting
out of craving regarding a feeling. It takes a great amount of effort to
remove such an assumption because it is literally who you are.

The undoing of your self-view is the only way that one can, after an
indeterminate amount of time, be free from suffering a feeling.

The common and natural way that a person tries to not suffer is to
manage pleasure and pain with the intent to increase the pleasure or get
rid of the pain. However, no matter how skilled one becomes at such
management, the main problem which is the gratuitous assumption of
ownership remains and as such that management can never bring liberation
from suffering because it is just another symptom of the problem,
another emotional response toward a feeling assumed as self. Acting out
emotionally by way of management so that one can no longer suffer a
feeling is a contradiction and a futile attempt because no amount of
increase in the symptoms (the emotions) will cure the disease (of
suffering). No amount of feeding the liability to suffer can cure the
liability to suffer. One could *manage* pleasure and pain by patiently
withstanding it without acting out of craving to increase or decrease
the feeling, and as such, the pressure of craving a feeling would still
be present, however, the only difference would be that as one patiently
withstands (I.e does not act out of craving), one also simultaneously
tries to remove the assumption of ownership through clarifying the
nature of feeling and by doing so the pressure of craving (suffering)
would diminish. That would be *Middle-way management*, which also helps
you cope but it destroys the problem, as opposed to emotional management
which only helps you cope with the problem you keep feeding.

One can restrain oneself from acting out angrily and succeed but such
restraint will not uproot the problem from causing more symptoms that
stem from ‘identification with feeling and craving against pain’ to
arise again. The restraint is necessary but understanding is crucial if
one wants to no longer need restraint management.

Many parents learn management skills from raising their young, they
learn to endure the burden of discomfort through various coping
mechanisms, and as a result, can take on a lot more pain. However,
despite that type of discipline, they still get angry, they still have
to try to be patient, and still have to employ some kind of management
technique in which to cope with their internal resistance towards pain,
their anger - their suffering.

Coping with one’s mental anguish is good but not good enough because it
means that one is still not exempt from suffering, it just means that
one has learned how to cope within the given parameters. The problem is
that those parameters do not stay the same. Circumstances change and can
bring various challenges that one may not be able to handle. Challenges
that could overwhelm even the most hardened individual. Take the case of
a military person who can deal with many life-threatening painful
situations, who can put their bodies through extreme pains, yet the loss
of a loved one will bring them to tears, from which they may never
recover. Despite enduring vast amounts of pain, there may still arise a
pain so tremendous that one cannot mentally cope.

<u>Delighting in the body, one’s mind is obstructed</u>

Another assumption that the common untrained person has is that this
body is “for me, mine, myself”. With such an assumption, attention is
then absorbed into sensory experiences. This means that when the body is
tired - the mind is clouded, when the body is heated - the mind is
lustful, when the body is in a neutral state - the mind is bored, when
the body is agitated - the mind is annoyed. When the mind is absorbed
with delight into the wild and untamed senses, the mind is hindered by
them, it is overwhelmed by lust, anger, restlessness, dullness,
confusion, and so on.

Delighting in the body means that one’s mind gets dragged around by the
body and as such one’s mental well-being is founded upon the bodily
state which is prone to change, which means for that person, equilibrium
of mind and long-term happiness is not a realistic goal. At most, they
can only undergo happiness or a sense of success for as long as there is
a comforting or pleasurable sense object manifesting for them.

How then can one be at peace no matter the bodily state or present
feeling? How to not suffer no matter what?

<u>Adopting a view to cope with suffering</u>

I could hope that everything will work out in the end. I could think
that bodily death will result in my eternal happiness. But none of those
beliefs or assumptions will result in an assurance, here and now, that I
am free from suffering or that I will never suffer again. Those beliefs
only help me cope once again with the fact that I suffer now, that I am
still susceptible to suffering, and that I do not know how to escape
such a situation.

I can resign to ideas like: “Such is life. That’s the way it is. This
too will change. God has a plan, etc”, and on account of those
concessions, I will feel some relief which doesn’t last very long, so I
will have to repeat those ideas like mantras, or scroll for another
uplifting quote, trying once again to help myself get along with the
fact that I do and can suffer.

What then is the escape from being subject to suffering? How can I no
longer need coping mechanisms? The common way to try and escape
suffering is through chasing a pleasant feeling, which results in one
trying to set up assurances through insurance policies, savings,
investments, vows of fidelity, dietary programs, skill acquisitions,
meditation programs, exercise routines, family development, property
acquisition, and any other form of ownership that will seemingly give
the result of having permanent access to pleasure. One goes about trying
to control the situation, trying to stabilize the unstable, through the
proliferation of ownership for the everlasting access to pleasure, which
is one’s only relief plan from the fundamental discomfort of existence
taken personally.

<u>Acquisition and distraction</u>

Those attempts at management rely on the fact that one is subject to
suffering. If one was no longer liable, then those attempts, those
various investments would no longer be emotionally needed. But as we
know, even if a person can own a vast empire, or control many things,
his acquisitions are based on a situation that is already out of his
control, a situation that is fundamentally unownable, thus his attempt
to own and control, and likewise with his adherence to certain
meditation techniques or spiritual practices and views. If he were to
reflect on this fundamental futile undertaking, he would most likely
drown in sorrow. Therefore various ‘acts of distraction’ that give him a
sense of security and help him from not facing the truth, become
priceless. Such is the value of the entertainment industry or the
significance of industry in general. (music, movies, culinary
explorations, travel, art, socializing, building, planning, religion,
retreats….)

All industry then can be seen as an attempt to satisfy one’s need for
freedom from suffering, yet the industry is built upon that suffering.
It is fueled by the existence of one’s personal liability to suffer, and
to stop such industrious activities, would result in one coming face to
face with one’s suffering that one has been trying to outrun. Hence the
apprehension of having nothing to do, the fear of solitude, stillness,
or peace.

So once again, how to solve this problem? Should we stop all activities?
No, because not all activities fuel the problem. It is only the
activities of acting out of craving and holding an assumption that needs
to be stopped for the problem to an end.

<u>Managing my personal feelings is no cure</u>

Our management acts such as chasing pleasure will never end in
contentment because there will always be a need for more since pleasures
to be had are infinite and subject to change. However, despite the
nature of feeling being so evident yet subtle, we do not know it and
therefore the assumption that the only way to escape suffering is
pleasure is maintained and fueled by the assumption of ownership of
feeling, even though it’s obvious that feeling is not mine because if it
were I wouldn’t be chasing it down. Such is the ordinary absurd mode of
existence.

If pleasure is the escape from suffering then how much of it is required
to result in never craving pleasure again?

One can think of all the pleasures that one has had and see that it
hasn’t worked out because still, you are subject to suffering. This
realization could leave you discouraged, this realization that you
cannot get all the pleasures that you desire and therefore it would be
impossible for you to be free from suffering… “Unless I win the
lottery!”, you may think, which might give you some glimmer of hope,
“Maybe just one big boost of pleasure would solve the problem?

If you are at least understanding that the pleasures that could be had
are infinite and your assumption that “pleasure is the escape from
suffering”, will result in a never-ending story of dissatisfaction
because of pleasure being in its nature subject to change and
un-ownable, then you should investigate further, for example, “Is
pleasure even necessary in the first place? I chase pleasure because I
think that,”Without it, I will continue to suffer”, so it seems vital.
One assumes that it will cure ones suffering, but then when pleasure
arises it is felt as though it’s not enough, and then it ceases sometime
later and my suffering remains unchanged, which means that the pleasure
that I worked so hard for, did not remedy my liability to suffering or
even decrease its existence in any way. Therefore, pain is not the cause
of my liability to suffering, because experiencing pleasure is not the
cure. When I feel pleasure, I suffer for it to be, when I feel pain, I
suffer for it to not be. Either way, my liability to suffer remains
steady.

<u>What exactly is the cause of my suffering?</u>

When I suffer, I crave for it to disappear. That attitude, subtle as it
is, is an attempt to get away from suffering, and so from the start, on
that level, I begin the hopeless activity of trying to get rid of
suffering by fueling it through my blind act of devotion towards chasing
pleasure and contempt for pain.

One who has some self-reflexive abilities might then begin to challenge
those gratuitous assumptions that pleasure is good and that it results
in non-suffering, or that pain is bad, that it causes one to suffer and
must be gotten rid of by any means necessary especially by the means of
pleasure which is fundamentally good because that is what I am.

Is pleasure really good? Is it mine? We can already see that it carries
no usefulness as a means of escape from suffering and no amount of
assumed ownership changes that. Is pain the source of our suffering? We
can see through these reflections that if the pain is the source, then
escape is impossible because pain is always possible despite
experiencing pleasure.

Ordinarily, when someone suffers pain, they automatically try to get rid
of it, because they fundamentally, without question, don’t want to feel
it and assume that pain is the problem and pleasure is the solution.
Failing to see that if that were the case, they would already no longer
have a problem and therefore no longer need a solution.

There is pain and there will be pain. If I had a say in that, there
would be no pain, to begin with, but there is pain, therefore I have no
say in that. And when I resist it, I suffer it. When I try to make it
not be, when I think that the pain which is not in my control, is in my
control, I foolishly maintain my suffering. Again, if it were mine to
control, then it would not exist in the first place.

One can realize that this pain, which has arisen by whatever means it
has arisen, is not mine because it has appeared. I feel it but I do not
own it. This type of contemplation helps one to restart, so to speak,
from a place of what is true rather than from a place of assumption, or
ignorance, and if we want to get down to the bottom of our suffering to
uproot its cause, then we have to start seeing what we are doing wrong,
we need to see what is occurring and this requires us to not
automatically react by struggling to get rid of pain and delighting in
pleasures and to be honest with ourselves about the failure in the
previous means by which we were trying to be free from suffering.

I can delight in pleasure and I can hate pain, but either way pleasure
and pain will arise and my delight and hate will not make any difference
but will maintain the fact that when there is a feeling, and there is
always a feeling, I will be emotionally affected one way or another.

All this means is that suffering is not caused by what is felt, but is
rooted in my gratuitous assumption of ownership and my attitude towards
it. If I did not resist my pain, I could not have an emotional state of
anger, which requires resistance against my pain. If I did not delight
in my pleasure, I could not have an emotional state of passion, which
requires delighting in my pleasure.

<u>Detachment from feeling</u>

Feeling arises and ceases due to conditions that are also not my own,
and while that happens, I am never its owner, my attitude of resistance
towards it provides me with no protection from suffering and makes it
worse, and things are only bad because I have unknowingly made them so
through my gratuitous assumptions about what I am experiencing.

A feeling manifests blind to our attitudes, emotions, and sense of
ownership. A feeling doesn’t even know we exist, and how could it, it is
just a feeling that feels.

Such realizations and repeated considerations along the right lines of
the Middle-way application will slowly result in detachment from feeling
i.e, the letting go of feeling through the destruction of assumptions.
Such an indirect letting go of what is felt, on account of understanding
that one can never hold on in the first place, directly results in an
increase in non-agitation regarding an arisen feeling, it results in a
more peaceful mind and body which are no longer emotionally charged up
through an assumption of ownership and desperate attempts to control
what is felt. The feeling is just left alone and one is no longer
touched by it, so to speak, because one no longer touches it by taking
it personally.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Samyutta Nikaya 36.3:**

<div class="english">

> When one experiences pleasure, if one does not understand the feeling,
> the tendency to lust is present, for one not seeing the escape from
> it.
>
> When one experiences pain, If one does not understand the feeling, the
> tendency to aversion is present, for one not seeing the escape from
> it.
>
> The one of vast wisdom has taught regarding that peaceful feeling,
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant: If one seeks delight even in this, one
> is still not released from suffering.
>
> But when a bhikkhu who is diligent, does not neglect discernment, then
> that intelligent man fully understands feelings in their entirety.
>
> Having fully understood feelings, he is undefiled in this very life.
> Abiding in Dhamma, with the body’s breakup, the knowledge-master
> cannot be fathomed.”

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**SN 36.4. The Bottomless Abyss:**

<div class="english">

> Bhikkhus, when the untaught common person makes the statement, ‘In the
> great ocean there is a bottomless abyss,’ he makes such a statement
> about something nonexistent and unreal. This, bhikkhus, is rather a
> designation for painful bodily feelings, that is, a ‘bottomless
> abyss.’
>
> When the untaught worldling is contacted by a painful bodily feeling,
> he sorrows, grieves, and laments; he weeps and beats his breast and
> becomes distraught. This is called an untaught worldling who has not
> risen in the bottomless abyss, one who has not gained a foothold.
>
> But, bhikkhus, when the instructed noble disciple is contacted by a
> painful bodily feeling, he does not sorrow, grieve, or lament; he does
> not weep and beat his breast and become distraught. This is called an
> instructed noble disciple who has risen in the bottomless abyss, one
> who has gained a foothold.
>
> One who cannot withstand the arisen painful feelings, bodily feelings
> that sap one’s life, Who trembles when they touch him, a weakling of
> little strength, who cries out loud: He has not risen from the
> bottomless abyss, nor has he even gained a foothold.
>
> But one who can withstand (Adhivāseti) them, the arisen painful
> feelings, bodily feelings that sap one’s life, Who trembles not when
> they touch him: He has risen in the bottomless abyss, and has gained a
> foothold.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**SN 36.6 The Dart:**

<div class="english">

> “Bhikkhus, the uninstructed common person, feels a pleasant feeling, a
> painful feeling, and a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. The
> instructed noble disciple also feels a pleasant feeling, a painful
> feeling, and a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. Therein,
> bhikkhus, what is the distinction, the disparity, the difference
> between the instructed noble disciple and the uninstructed common
> person?”….
>
> …“Bhikkhus, when the uninstructed common person is being contacted by
> a painful feeling, he sorrows, grieves, and laments; he weeps, beating
> his breast, and becomes distraught. He feels two feelings—a bodily one
> and a mental one. Suppose they were to strike a man with a dart, and
> then they would strike him immediately afterward with a second dart so
> that the man would feel a feeling caused by two darts. Similarly, when
> the uninstructed common person is being contacted by a painful feeling
> … he feels two feelings—a bodily one and a mental one.
>
> “Being contacted by that same painful feeling, he harbors aversion
> towards it. When he harbors aversion toward painful feeling, the
> underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling lies behind
> this. Being contacted by a painful feeling, he seeks delight in
> sensual pleasure. For what reason? Because the uninstructed ordinary
> person does not know of any escape from painful feeling other than
> sensual pleasure. When he seeks delight in sensual pleasure, the
> underlying tendency to passion for pleasant feeling lies behind this.
> He does not understand as it is the appearance and the disappearance,
> the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of these
> feelings. When he does not understand these things, the underlying
> tendency to ignorance regarding neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling
> lies behind this.
>
> “If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it attached. If he feels a
> painful feeling, he feels it attached. If he feels a
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it attached. This,
> bhikkhus, is called an uninstructed common person who is attached to
> birth, aging, and death; who is attached to sorrow, lamentation, pain,
> displeasure, and despair; who is attached to suffering, I say.
>
> “Bhikkhus, when the instructed noble disciple is contacted by a
> painful feeling, he does not sorrow, grieve, or lament; he does not
> weep, beat his breast, and become distraught. He feels one feeling—a
> bodily one, not a mental one. Suppose they were to strike a man with a
> dart, but they would not strike him immediately afterward with a
> second dart so that the man would feel a feeling caused by one dart
> only. Similarly, when the instructed noble disciple is contacted by a
> painful feeling … he feels one feeling—a bodily one, not a mental one.
>
> “Being contacted by that same painful feeling, he harbors no aversion
> towards it. Since he harbors no aversion toward painful feeling, the
> underlying tendency to aversion toward painful feeling does not lie
> behind this. Being contacted by a painful feeling, he does not seek
> delight in sensual pleasure. For what reason? Because the instructed
> noble disciple knows of an escape from painful feeling other than
> sensual pleasure. Since he does not seek delight in sensual pleasure,
> the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling does not lie
> behind this. He understands as it is the appearance and the
> disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the
> case of these feelings. Since he understands these things, the
> underlying tendency to ignorance regarding
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling does not lie behind this.
>
> “If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it detached. If he feels a
> painful feeling, he feels it detached. If he feels a
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it detached. This,
> bhikkhus, is called a noble disciple who is detached from birth,
> aging, and death; who is detached from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
> displeasure, and despair; who is detached from suffering, I say.
>
> “This, bhikkhus, is the distinction, the disparity, the difference
> between the instructed noble disciple and the uninstructed common
> person.”
>
> The wise one, knowledgeable, does not feel the pleasant and painful
> mental feeling. This is the great difference between the wise one and
> the ordinary person.
>
> For the knowledgeable one who has comprehended Dhamma, who clearly
> sees this world and the next, desirable things do not provoke his
> mind, and towards the undesired, he has no aversion.
>
> For him attraction and repulsion no more exist; both have been
> extinguished, brought to an end. Having known the dust-free,
> sorrowless state, the transcender of existence rightly understands.”

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**SN 36.7. The Sick Ward:**

<div class="english">

> Bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu dwells thus, mindful and clearly
> comprehending, diligent, ardent, and resolute if there arises in him a
> pleasant feeling, he understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me a
> pleasant feeling. Now that is dependent, not independent. Dependent on
> what? Dependent on this very body. But this body is impermanent,
> conditioned, dependently arisen. So when the pleasant feeling has
> arisen in dependence on a body that is impermanent, conditioned,
> dependently arisen, how could it be permanent?’ He dwells
> contemplating impermanence in the body and pleasant feeling, he dwells
> contemplating vanishing, contemplating fading away, contemplating
> cessation, contemplating relinquishment. As he dwells thus, the
> underlying tendency to lust regarding the body and regarding pleasant
> feeling is abandoned by him.
>
> Bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu dwells thus, mindful and clearly
> comprehending, diligent, ardent, and resolute if there arises in him a
> painful feeling, he understands thus: ‘There has arisen in me a
> painful feeling. Now that is dependent, not independent. Dependent on
> what? Dependent on just this body. But this body is impermanent,
> conditioned, dependently arisen. So when the painful feeling has
> arisen in dependence on a body that is impermanent, conditioned,
> dependently arisen, how could it be permanent?’ He dwells
> contemplating impermanence in the body and painful feeling, he dwells
> contemplating vanishing, contemplating fading away, contemplating
> cessation, contemplating relinquishment. As he dwells thus, the
> underlying tendency to aversion regarding the body and in regard to
> painful feeling is abandoned by him.
>
> Bhikkhus, while a bhikkhu dwells thus, mindful and clearly
> comprehending, diligent, ardent, and resolute if there arises in him a
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands thus: ‘There has
> arisen in me a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. Now that is
> dependent, not independent. Dependent on what? Dependent on just this
> body. But this body is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen.
> So when the neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling has arisen in
> dependence on a body that is impermanent, conditioned, dependently
> arisen, how could it be permanent?’ He dwells contemplating
> impermanence in the body and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he
> dwells contemplating vanishing, contemplating fading away,
> contemplating cessation, contemplating relinquishment. As he dwells
> thus, the underlying tendency to ignorance regarding the body and
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling is abandoned by him.
>
> If he feels a pleasant feeling, he understands: ‘It is impermanent’;
> he understands: ‘It is not held to’; he understands: ‘It is not
> delighted in.’ If he feels a painful feeling, he understands: ‘It is
> impermanent’; he understands: ‘It is not held to’; he understands: ‘It
> is not delighted in.’ If he feels a neither-painful-nor-pleasant
> feeling, he understands: ‘It is impermanent’; he understands: ‘It is
> not held to’; he understands: ‘It is not delighted in.’
>
> If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it detached; if he feels a
> painful feeling, he feels it detached; if he feels a
> neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it detached.
>
> When he feels a feeling terminating with the body, he understands: ‘I
> feel a feeling terminating with the body.’ When he feels a feeling
> terminating with life, he understands: ‘I feel a feeling terminating
> with life.’ He understands: ‘With the breakup of the body, following
> the exhaustion of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will
> become cool right here.’
>
> Just as, bhikkhus, an oil lamp burns in dependence on the oil and the
> wick, and with the exhaustion of the oil and the wick it is
> extinguished through lack of fuel, so too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu
> feels a feeling terminating with the body … terminating with life … He
> understands: ‘With the breakup of the body, following the exhaustion
> of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will become cool
> right here.’

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**SN 36.12. The Sky:**

<div class="english">

> Bhikkhus, just as various winds blow in the sky: winds from the east,
> winds from the west, winds from the north, winds from the south, dusty
> winds and dustless winds, cold winds and hot winds, mild winds and
> strong winds; so too, various feelings arise in this body: pleasant
> feeling arises, painful feeling arises, neither-painful-nor-pleasant
> feeling arises.”
>
> Just as many diverse winds blow back and forth across the sky,
> easterly winds and westerly winds, northerly winds and southerly
> winds, dusty winds and dustless winds, sometimes cold, sometimes hot,
> those that are strong and others mild, winds of many kinds that blow.
>
> So in this very body here, various kinds of feelings arise, pleasant
> ones and painful ones, and those neither painful nor pleasant.
>
> That wise one, not neglecting discernment, fully understands feelings
> in their entirety. Having fully understood feelings, he is undefiled
> in this very life. Standing in Dhamma, with the body’s breakup, the
> knowledge-master cannot be reckoned.

</div>

</div>

<div id="thaniyo_essay3_making_peace_with_feeling.md">

### Making Peace With Feeling

By making peace with what is felt, one is developing *metta* or non-ill
will. By that I mean, no longer interfering with what is felt, by no
longer trying to change it, but by withstanding it, by not craving it,
by fully comprehending it.

When you feel pleasure, your default mode is to try and keep it, you
want it to stay, you try to increase it because it does not feel
adequate, there is something about it that just isn’t satisfying you,
yet it is ‘pleasure’, it is already enough of what it is in itself. In
other words, pleasure is not good enough for you, you crave for it to be
more, to last longer, and so on.

Your delighting in pleasure will not make you content, because it’s an
agitated attempt to keep pleasure, it’s a holding on to something which
is not yours and impossible to make your own. Such an act is not only
lustful but also aversive and ignorant, an act of wanting things to be
the way you want them to be and not the way they are.

When you feel pain, your default mode is to try to get rid of it, to
decrease it. Yet it is the way it is and your attempt to change it is
again not peaceful, it’s not kind, not compassionate, not content, not
equanimous. You don’t want pain so you seek pleasure but when you get
it, still you are not satisfied. After all, it can never be yours. Your
gratuitous attitude of craving can never be satisfied no matter what you
put in front of it. Its nature is to be unfulfilled.

You want the pain to change and you want pleasure not to change. You
want *anicca* and you don’t want *anicca*. Wanting *anicca* is wanting
*dukkha*. This wanting or interfering with feeling which changes is
maintaining your liability to be affected by feeling, which means you
will never be peaceful, your mind will be dragged around with feeling in
whichever way it goes. This wanting and touching feeling means that you
will always be affected by it. In other words, you love when it’s
pleasant and hate when it’s unpleasant. You are on and will continue to
be on an emotional rollercoaster because you take feelings personally,
you are holding them.

By detaching from a feeling through understanding its nature, and by no
longer touching it with your attitude of wanting/craving, by way of not
acting out of intentions based on greed, hate, or delusion, the feeling
will not affect you anymore, you will be unable to love and therefore
unable to hate. Your mental state will be brought to equilibrium, peace,
and *upekkha*.

The reason I am emphasizing having the attitude of *metta* towards what
is felt is because it’s a refined act of non-craving, which if
sustained, will eventually result in there being no possibility of
hating anyone, because the only reason you find another person or
situation irritating to the point of hatred, is because you hate the
pain that has arisen and you long for the pleasure that is forever out
of your control.

<u>**Love or non-hate.**</u>

The problem that you can encounter if you think the *metta* practice
taught in the suttas by the Buddha, is the practice of love, is that you
will continue to delight in pleasure dependent on the senses, which
means you will also hate or be irritated when there is not enough of it.
The degree to which you love is the degree to which you can hate.

*Metta* is not about love but non-hate. It’s a quality that a great
friend has. They can never hate you because they cannot love you. They
are not emotionally dependent on feelings, their minds are undisturbed,
peaceful, and therefore can be of great benefit to another who is
clouded by love and hate or affected by feelings. No matter what you do,
they see clearly when you do not. Their benevolence, their *metta* is
“unconditioned”.

*Metta* when fully developed becomes *upekkha*, complete peaceful
detachment, and that cannot come about when you are doing something
which is not peaceful, like fighting or even delighting in pleasure
desperately holding on to it so that it doesn’t change. That is not the
path of peace or renunciation.

Renunciation of pleasure means not interfering with it, renunciation of
pain means not interfering with it. Renunciation means non-craving.

When there is pain practice *metta* towards that. When there is
pleasure, practice *metta* towards that, not wanting it to stay or
change, i.e. unconditional friendliness.

If you want to practice *metta* for the uprooting of the cause of
suffering, then you must let go of the feeling, let it be what it is,
patiently withstand it, without interfering, and then you will be in a
good position to see its nature, which is *agitating*. All feeling
agitates and by holding on to it, by touching it, you are agitated,
sometimes a lot as with pain or only a little as with pleasure, either
way, feeling is an agitation. You can then realize that there is no such
thing as pleasure, there are only different degrees of pain, and all
this time, what you thought was pleasure was just less pain, and due to
that assumption you held on to it as yours, as yourself, and thus were
affected by its agitated nature.

The more you let go of your craving regarding a feeling the less it will
affect you and the more peaceful/*upekkha* you become. This means that
no matter what happens in life, no matter how much pain is ‘caused to
you by another being’, you will be peaceful, and you will not be able to
get angry, hateful, or irritated. Your mind will be a *brahmavihara*/a
heavenly place because you removed the cause of love and hate from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Sutta Nipāta 1.8 Metta Sutta:**

> <div class="english">
>
> “This is what is to be done by those who are skilled in goodness, and
> who fully understand the path of peace.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> “Karaṇīyamatthakusalena, Yanta santaṃ padaṃ abhisamecca;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> They are competent and honorable, possessing integrity, well-spoken,
> gentle, and not conceited;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Sakko ujū ca suhujū ca, Sūvaco cassa mudu anatimānī.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Contented and easy to support, unbusied, frugal in their ways,  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Santussako ca subharo ca, Appakicco ca sallahukavutti;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> With peaceful faculties, clever, not intrusive or greedy amongst
> families.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Santindriyo ca nipako ca, Appagabbho kulesvananugiddho.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Not doing the slightest thing that the wise would find fault with.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Na ca khuddamācare kiñci, Yena viññū pare upavadeyyuṃ;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Happy and secure, May all beings be happy!  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Sukhino va khemino hontu, Sabbasattā bhavantu sukhitattā.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Whatever living creatures, moving or unmoving, without leaving any
> out, long or large, medium, short, unusually shaped, visible or
> invisible, living far or near, those born or to be born:  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Ye keci pāṇabhūtatthi, Tasā vā thāvarā vanavasesā; Dīghā vā ye va
> mahantā, Majjhimā rassakā aṇukathūlā. Diṭṭhā vā ye va adiṭṭhā, Ye va
> dūre vasanti avidūre; Bhūtā va sambhavesī va,  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> May all beings be happy!  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Sabbasattā bhavantu sukhitattā.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Not acting against, nor despising anyone anywhere.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Na paro paraṃ nikubbetha, Nātimaññetha katthaci na kañci;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Even when irritated by the perception of resistance, not wishing
> suffering on anyone.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Byārosanā paṭighasañña, Nāññamaññassa dukkhamiccheyya.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Just as a mother would protect her only beneficial child,  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Mātā yathā niyaṃ puttam Āyusā ekaputtamanurakkhe;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Likewise, all beings should develop an unrestricted mind.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Evampi sabbabhūtesu, Mānasaṃ bhāvaye aparimāṇaṃ.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Metta/Benevolent towards the whole world, develop an unrestricted
> mind.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Mettañca sabbalokasmi, Mānasaṃ bhāvaye aparimāṇaṃ;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Above, below, all-around, unconfined, friendly, and without enemies.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Uddhaṃ adho ca tiriyañca, Asambādhaṃ averamasapattaṃ.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Whether standing, walking, sitting, or lying down, not becoming
> weary,  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Tiṭṭhaṃ caraṃ nisinno va, Sayāno yāvatāssa vitamiddho;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Always remember this; for this, is the dwelling of the gods.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Etaṃ satiṃ adhiṭṭheyya, Brahmametaṃ vihāramidhamāhu.  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Attained to view, accomplished in insight and virtue,  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Diṭṭhiñca anupaggamma, Sīlavā dassanena sampanno;  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="english">
>
> Liberated by the destruction of sensual desire, they are never again
> conceived in a womb.”  
>
> </div>
>
> <div class="pali2">
>
> Kāmesu vinaya gedhaṃ, Na hi jātuggabbhaseyya punaretī”ti.
>
> </div>

</div>

<div id="thaniyo_essay4_going_through_dukkha.md">

### Going Through Dukkha

*If I experience a painful feeling in relation to a bodily sensation,
such as a backache, should I then just leave that ache alone without
trying to get rid of it, so that my craving and suffering diminish?*

If your attitude behind your action is not one of craving, then you can
do whatever it takes to heal the backache. Lay down, take an ibuprofen,
etc.

Using medicines or trying to heal the body doesn’t have to involve
craving, but it will unless you know the Middle way (non-lust,
non-aversion, non-distraction) to escape from craving.

Pain can be managed, but one must do so in such a way that uproots one’s
suffering (the starving of craving) rather than managing one’s suffering
(the feeding of craving).

By no longer acting out of craving, which you have been doing habitually
since you can remember, you can begin to discern the nature of that
attitude of craving, which does not disappear as soon as you decide to
stop following it. As one becomes aware of craving, one becomes aware of
suffering in all its gory details. It feels pretty intense and seems
like it’s going to last forever. No ibuprofen or physical relaxation is
going to help with that suffering. The point is that you can manage your
physical pain without feeding your suffering.

When you don’t act out of craving, you will discover its true nature.
You get to see the extent of *Dukkha*.

Now, any act of craving, no matter how small, will fuel that dukkha and
keep you confined within it. Any management of that suffering will keep
you liable to the management of suffering. The only escape lies in
‘patient endurance’- the Middle way. In other words, the dukkha must be
experienced without adding more fuel to its fire, and as long as the
craving persists, it’s going to burn.

Trying to find a way to manage that suffering is inevitable. Likewise
with wanting to get rid of it. And if you manage not to do that, you
will come face to face with dukkha, which will seem everlasting. The
goal, however, is not to be moved by it, to no longer be affected even
if it is the most severe suffering you can imagine, even if it feels
like it will last forever. Dukkha must be overcome, and in order to do
that, you have to adopt this ‘middle way of non-craving’ attitude.

This non-doing of craving is one of the hardest things to accomplish.
Nevertheless, if you keep trying, you can eventually find the right
balance and at that *point*, you must stay, until there is no longer a
problem with dukkha. Which means it’s no longer dukkha.

</div>

<div id="essays_by_sister_medhini.md">

## Essays by Sister Medhini

</div>

<div id="medhini_essay1_living_under_an_authority.md">

### Living Under An Authority

As long as one is alive, being subject to some sort of authority or
authorities is inevitable[^142]. An authority is here meant in a rather
general sense of something or someone who is in a position to exert
influence or control over your behavior or circumstances, in ways that
may be covert or overt.

Most of the time, an authority has to either convince, persuade or
hypnotize us that to follow his rule is indeed what is for our benefit
and is the best thing to do, (so that we do so of our own accord); or
use more subtle ways of making life a bit less agreeable for people who
don’t do so, so that they will modify their behavior as a reflex, but
without being generally aware of why they are doing so. As a last
resort, authorities may turn to brute force. But this is unsustainable
over long periods and with large numbers of people. So generally it is
only used in certain extreme cases (i.e. the inmates of prisons), or
extreme scenarios (war, etc.)

An example of authority benignly doing its job in the first manner would
be something like city councils providing footpaths for people to walk
on in cities, while the rest of the road is designated for cars. I’ve
never heard anyone complaining about the curtailment of their freedom to
walk in whatever part of the road they please. I would bet that very few
people even see this as an imposed structure on their behavior by an
authority, (although it is). The arrangement is simply taken for
granted, for the rather good reason that it factually works. And there
is a generally shared understanding of this.

Obviously, it would be good - ideal - if every form of imposed structure
on people’s behavior by authorities, could be like this; and would
always be something that everyone could comply with willingly and in
full awareness. But what is required for that is that everyone involved
should have a shared understanding of, and agreement on, the arrangement
that will be for the welfare of all; or at least a common *view* as to
the *principles* governing such an arrangement. And this is an
impossibility. Even in very small and specific communities, it is close
to impossible, though not *entirely* impossible.[^143]

So practically always, at least some of the people will need some
persuading, and even with much persuasion and propaganda, many people
will need a degree of faith that the authority knows what is best for
them better than they themselves do, or they will follow orders with a
degree of skepticism and a degree of reluctance, just for the sake of
not being harassed by the authority or by others.

**Owner of your actions**

The first important point to understand regarding this is the following:
no authority can make anyone do anything.

<div class="english">

> Beings are owners of their actions, heirs of their actions; originate
> from their actions, are bound to their actions, and have their actions
> as their refuge.

</div>

> —MN 135

Nobody else can possibly be responsible for your own deed. All an
authority can do is impose certain consequences for not acting according
to their law; or offer certain rewards for acting according to their
law. They can also (more underhandly) choose to curtail or control
people’s access to information, or use other means to take advantage of
people’s inauthenticity so that although people appear to be doing
something ‘of their own accord’; in truth, almost nobody is genuinely
taking responsibility for their own choice to do such and such thing,
but rather acting out of fear or a sense of duty to do what they are
‘supposed to be doing.’

Or, In the best case, if the authority has some wisdom, they can clearly
and properly set forth, according to proper reasoning, why acting in
such and such a way is for your welfare and benefit, acting in such and
such ways is for your harm and the harm of others; so that you
understand for yourself why it is better to act in this way and can take
responsibility for that choice, without resenting the authority.[^144]

So to re-emphasize, no authority can make anyone act in a particular
way. All they can do is influence the consequences of acting in one way
or another. Yet, for much of their lives, people end up doing lots of
things - even most things - with the impression of being to some extent
*obliged* to do them. What this impression practically involves is the
belief that there is *no other choice*. In truth, though, there is
always another choice to act differently - which will necessarily have
consequences. Some are worse than others.

When somebody cannot bear so much as thinking about certain kinds of
consequences, they habitually shut their eyes to the mere possibility of
a whole range of actions that might provoke such consequences, and
consequently, feel *obliged* to act in certain ways. (This is only part
of the story, though, because while entertaining the possibility of an
action with very unpleasant consequences is painful enough, it is still
generally not as painful as having to face, time and time again, the
need to make a decision ‘what should I do?’ with the full weight of that
decision lying squarely on one’s own shoulders.)

Being authentic involves refusing to allow yourself any notion of being
obliged to do anything, and taking responsibility for every single
choice you make. This is what will force you to be honest about why you
are choosing one thing and not another. To take a common contemporary
example, if somebody has doubts about a certain vaccine but happens to
have a job for which the vaccine is mandatory, it would be easy for them
to feel that they are being obliged to be vaccinated against their will;
not acknowledging the fact that the choice to act differently is still
open to them, though the consequences of it might be quite unpleasant to
face. An authentic person would be able to reflect, for example, *I’m
getting this vaccine because, although I don’t trust that I have at hand
all the relevant information, and I do think I could be taking a risk;
on the whole, I still don’t see this as justifying giving up my job
while having children to support.* (It should of course be borne in mind
that this is just one example for illustrative purposes, the reader may
replace it with whatever equivalent example they can think of.)

**What is not yours**

Perhaps slightly harder to understand, but equally important, is the
point that not only are you solely responsible for your own actions, but
you are responsible for; the owner of, *solely* your own actions -
*nothing else*.

Anyone who has been born is subject to all sorts of changes,
disturbances, and troubles that are *utterly inaccessible* to their
control. The actions of other people, the quality and quantity of
information you have access to, the words of other people, the
conditions of the world; the weather, and the state of health and
decline of your own body - all come under this. In other words, you can
decide what you do; but that choice and the motivation for it is always
strictly internal; there is no way for your choice to access things
beyond it, just as there is no way for other things or people to access
the domain of your own intentional choice.

Specifically, when you make a choice out of wanting to avoid a certain
unpleasant result, or wanting to arrive at a certain pleasant result,
any result that comes about whether it is experienced as pleasant or
unpleasant - is in an entirely different domain. It happens, so to
speak, by itself.

So for instance, in the example above, somebody might say ‘But it’s not
*right* that they make vaccination mandatory for nurses, there
*shouldn’t* be this consequence for this kind of choice.’ But these are
quite clearly things that belong to others, and that pertains in fact to
an entire domain that doesn’t and cannot belong to you. Whether other
people think and act rightly or wrongly, belongs to them; what belongs
to you are, for instance, the words that you can say to them, but you
can’t give them anything more than the sound of your voice. Equally, in
terms of your own body’s health or sickness, all that you have is the
ability to administer medicine and the possibility to investigate the
causes of disease, but that is as far as it goes. Whether the medicine
works and how it works, belongs to what is essentially the nature of
matter, a different domain that is totally beyond your ability to
access.

Thinking rightly or wrongly depends on the degree to which our thought
corresponds to how things actually are. Whenever people act wrongly and
harmfully, they are trying to exert control and mastery over things
(like other people’s actions) that can’t possibly be controlled by them.

So an authority can at any time arbitrarily decide to impose
restrictions and strictures on your own daily life whenever they so
choose. If a person is bothered by this, although the change to their
life might be troublesome in itself in various ways, what is truly
bothersome is the fact that it should be possible at all. (That’s when
you hear people saying things like ‘that shouldn’t be allowed… we should
be consulted… there should be some process or other…’ etc.) But this
comes back to why I began with this first point, which is something a
person needs to see for themselves at least to some extent if any of
this is to be comprehensible: to live as a human being (or indeed any
kind of being) is to have *some* sort of authority over you. Such that
the conditions of your life and the consequences of everyday actions may
be suddenly changed at any moment.

So this bother is a recognition of something much more deep-rooted and
universal, which is this very discrepancy I’m trying to get at: those
things that one naturally takes to be one’s own and holds dear, are
fundamentally *not* one’s own. (Because if some aspect of your life may
be arbitrarily taken away by some authority or other, whether for valid
reasons or not, then it must necessarily belong more to the authority
than it does to you.)

<div class="english">

> “I have sons, I have wealth.”  
> Thus the fool frets.  
> He himself is not his own -.  
> How then, sons? How then, wealth?

</div>

> —Dhp 62

Being a fundamental bother, pertaining to the nature of things in
general, the only way to overcome it is to address it at this level.
(rather than, say, taking up specific issues with the city council or
what-have-you.)

This is done by, in a nutshell, learning how to stop mistakenly holding
as your own those things which cannot be your own.

**How to let go of what isn’t yours.**

This phrase, ‘let go of what isn’t yours,’ is repeated many times in the
suttas, and is something that is repeated a lot in Buddhism generally.
The problem is that at least most people if they try to simply *do* this
directly, will probably end up doing it wrongly. (The reason being that
they would be trying to ‘let go’ of things by way of the exact same
attitude and view with which they were holding those things from the
beginning. In other words, if it were really up to you whether to let go
of something or to keep it, then we wouldn’t have a problem. The point
is to recognize that regardless of whether you let go or not, the thing
was never yours, to begin with.)

That is why I have been emphasizing responsibility: it might seem
paradoxical, but the most practical way to let go of futile suffering is
to *first fully* accept all the responsibility wherever you possibly
can - and never allow yourself to be obliged to act in any way. If a
person were to genuinely take this as a practice and keep it in mind
throughout everything they were to do, it would naturally become
possible for them to give up the source of this bother (and ultimately
the source of all bother whatsoever.)

One practical example of this at a relatively mundane level would follow
from the one I gave above: if somebody took a vaccine while feeling
obliged to do so, either because of a general sense of duty despite some
misgivings, or even because it was mandatory for them to keep their job;
if they later find out that the authority - who they deem responsible
for *making* them take the vaccine - had not been honest, and/or the
vaccine turns out to have worse side-effects than imagined, their mind
will then definitely give rise to quite a lot of anger, frustration, and
resentment.

But if somebody took a vaccine while being fully clear and authentic
about their reasons for doing so, aware that they were taking a risk,
and that they were choosing to do so because it was still overall the
better choice rather than the available alternatives - then they might
find out the exact same information, or even undergo some actual
ill-effect of vaccination, but would suffer far less mental disturbance
and turmoil on account of it. Nor would this make them any less capable
of seeing and judging the immorality of the actions of the relevant
authorities.

More generally, if you start correctly seeing the domain of your
responsibility, this will also naturally make you more able to see where
it ends; what is *not* in your hand and not up to you. This includes
pretty much everything else, most pertinently the things that happen to
you, and whether they are pleasant or unpleasant.

You could then recognize the following very important truth: that
aversion, fear, or really any kind of *bother* regarding anything that
can arise, is directly maintained by assuming that the painful thing is
the situation, and so trying to deal with it, avoid it, get rid of it,
etc - to get rid of the pain of it. (Incidentally, but importantly, it’s
also maintained by acting on the corresponding assumption regarding
*pleasant* things, assuming that pleasure is to be found *in* a
particular experience or situation; so I must get it, access it,
experience it, have it.) In trying to deal with things on this level,
you keep maintaining the notion that you *could* have some say in the
situation, that you can ‘get at it’. Which is exactly how you allow
things to ‘get at you’.

An image that might help to convey this is a small room, with six
windows or doors, and this room confines you, while you keep trying to
get out of it. But each time you break down one of its windows or doors
or try and go out to the thing you see passing outside, the initial
release quickly reveals itself to be another - slightly smaller -
version of the exact same room.

For as long as you keep trying to escape in that way, you will maintain
the implicit assumption that this sort of escape can provide release.
And you won’t see how your escape attempts are what is making the room
even smaller, the confinement even tighter, nor will it be possible to
see the genuine release. And that is because the genuine release is not
*outside* of the confinement, but more like a kind of reconfiguration of
your vision so that you can see how the same thing is not confining at
all anymore - precisely because you see that there is <u>no need</u> to
escape in that way, *which was never possible to the begin with*.

In practical terms, it comes down, again, to realize that any suffering
at all is never because of the situation, but purely because of the
aversion or craving regarding it: an entirely unnecessary, futile, and
gratuitous thing for which you are directly and solely responsible.
Again, this sentence can be stated theoretically, but it has to be
recognized through truly seeing that which is *not up to you*: whatever
you do, in a fundamental sense your situation is always going its own
way. It gets better sometimes, it gets worse sometimes. This would be
how you can see that your only responsibility therein is also what is at
the root of all that is painful and suffering in it, namely the craving,
which is maintained *by trying to deal with the situation so as to get
rid of the pain of it*. And if you were to see this you could let go of
it, which is when you would not suffer albeit amidst the same
circumstances that would previously have caused you much suffering.

**The extremity**

It might be asked whether there is any limit to this principle. - I have
said ‘no matter what the situation’; is this a figure of speech that in
some extreme scenario no longer holds true? The answer is that there are
no limits whatsoever to how far it *can* be taken, depending on how
seriously one takes the fundamental problem of one’s life and the degree
of effort one is prepared to dedicate to the task of overcoming it. The
suttas give many rather extreme examples of people who, having developed
their minds along such lines, do not experience anguish, even amidst the
worst kinds of suffering. My favorite is the story of a laywoman called
‘Nanda’s mother,’ who recounts the following:

<div class="english">

> I had an only son called Nanda who was dear and pleasing to me. The
> rulers forcibly abducted him on some pretext and had him executed. But
> when my son was under arrest or being arrested, imprisoned or being
> put in prison, killed or being killed, I cannot recall any change in
> the state of my mind.”

</div>

> —AN 7.53

This might seem initially like a totally incomprehensible or impossible
feat, only explicable by some sort of mystical or magical transformation
of a person into some sort of robot. (And many Buddhists do end up
taking it like this, though they might not admit it). But it is simply
the result of the same principle as we have been describing being
applied and developed to its full extent.

From a slightly different angle, if one takes responsibility for
choosing to live in the domain of a certain authority that one considers
to be oppressive, then the first natural reaction is to search for a
different place where there will be a less oppressive authority in
charge. But still, as I said, one will have to live under some authority
or another; and this principle has no limit: here is a passage from the
suttas spoken by Mara, who in the suttas is a deity who holds the
position of a top bureaucrat over the system of samsara, (by which he is
equally fully bound).

<div class="english">

> “The eye is mine, ascetic, forms are mine, eye-contact and its base of
> consciousness are mine. Where can you go, ascetic, to escape from me?
> The ear is mine, ascetic, sounds are mine … The nose is mine, ascetic,
> odors are mine … The tongue is mine, ascetic, tastes are mine … The
> body is mine, ascetic, tactile objects are mine … The mind is mine,
> ascetic, mental phenomena are mine, mind-contact and its base of
> consciousness are mine. Where can you go, ascetic, to escape from me?”

</div>

> —SN 4.19

In another sense, pertinently, Mara is also called the King of Death,
and this could be taken in a very literal sense. To be in the realm of
Mara is to be subject to old age and death. That is what holds sway over
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. That is the ultimate
authority. And the escape from it is still the same.

<div class="english">

> “That of which they say ‘It’s mine,’  
> And those who speak in terms of ‘mine’—  
> If your mind exists among these,  
> You won’t escape me, ascetic.”  
>   
> The Blessed One:  
> “That which they speak of is not mine,  
> I’m not one of those who speak of mine.  
> You should know thus, O Evil One:  
> Even my path you will not see.”

</div>

> —SN 4.19

</div>

[^1]: Even if one can control them, first they have to be. In other
    words – the nature of control is seen as something beyond our
    control.

[^2]: As a matter of fact, it’s not only the characteristic that is
    obscured, the five-aggregates are not seen either, most of the time.

[^3]: For a puthujjana it is not enough to see this once. It is only
    with the repetition of this insight (achieved through effort), that
    the habitual view of control will disappear, and be replaced
    (gradually too) with the view of an inherent lack of control – the
    view of impermanence. When it is seen that impermanence underlies
    every project of the Self, the Self ceases to be Self, since without
    its mastery, selfhood cannot stand. (Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Notes on
    Dhamma, PARAMATTHA SACCA, para. 6)

[^4]: Cf. Maurice Merleau-Ponty, in his Phenomenology of Perception,
    (Routledge Classics, 2007, p. 82): I detach myself from my
    experience and pass to the idea. Like the object, the idea purports
    to be the same for everybody, valid in all times and places, and the
    individuation of an object in an objective point of time and space
    finally appears as the expression of a universal positing power. I
    am no longer concerned with my body, nor with time, nor with the
    world, as I experience them in antepredicative knowledge, in the
    inner communion that I have with them. I now refer to my body only
    as a idea, to the universe as idea, to the idea of space and the
    idea of time. Thus ‘objective’ thought (in Kierkegaard’s sense) is
    formed – being that of common sense and of science – which finally
    causes us to lose contact with perceptual experience, of which it is
    nevertheless the outcome and the natural sequel. The whole life of
    consciousness is characterized by the tendency to posit objects,
    since it is consciousness, that is to say self-knowledge, only in so
    far as it takes hold of itself and draws itself together in an
    identifiable object. And yet the absolute positing of a single
    object is the death of consciousness, since it congeals the whole of
    existence, as a crystal placed in a solution suddenly crystallizes
    it.

[^5]: Time, as a phenomena in one’s experience, is regarded as more
    primordial (read – ‘permanent’), than the experience of things. The
    things seem to come and go, while the sense of time stays.

[^6]: Furthermore, nothing obliges us to think that ‘manifestation of
    aggregates’ refers to the event of coming-out-of-womb. The Buddha
    has said that “when mother and father come together and the mother
    is in season and the one to be tied is present, with the coming
    together of these three things, there is descent into the womb” (M.
    38/i 265-66). Thus, the five-aggregates are already manifested, in a
    way, even at the stage of an embryo, and before the infant is
    formed. (Cf. also A.III, 61/i, 176-7)

[^7]: And therefore it is not accidental that this is most commonly
    regarded as birth.

[^8]: This, in itself, is clearly impossible, since the “exactness”, in
    any area of science, is determined by the capacities of one’s
    perception (i.e. the refinement of our technology and observational
    instruments). (Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Notes on Dhamma, FUNDAMENTAL
    STRUCTURE, Static Aspect, para. 16.)

[^9]: It is very unlikely that the whole of humanity could actually
    agree on this (or anything), since all people are not the same. The
    birth of a baby, in this case, carries different significance for
    different individuals. A mother might say that her baby was born the
    moment she held it in her arms, and that it was conceived the moment
    she fell in love with its father. A scientist, in his carefully
    cultivated attitude of disinterestedness, might say that a baby is
    conceived when embryo cells become discernible (he observes it under
    his microscope!), and perhaps that it is born when it starts to
    breathe independently. For a doctor, involved in performing
    abortions, there is no question of ‘baby’ (i.e. ‘human’), until
    three months are due. Thus, it is how one feels towards ‘birth’, how
    one perceives it, how one intends it, that determines what that
    birth is for him. (“Contacted, monks, one feels; contacted, one
    intends; contacted, one perceives.” – Saḷāyatana Saṃyutta, iv,10.)
    Also, compare the passage from the Madhupiṇḍika Sutta, M. 18/i
    111-112:

    <div class="english">

    > Dependent on the eye and forms (ear, nose…) eye consciousness
    > arise. The meeting of three is contact. With contact as condition
    > there is feeling. What man feels, that he perceives. What he
    > perceives, that he thinks about. What he thinks about that he
    > diversifies. With what he diversified as the source calculations
    > about perceptions of diversification occupy a man with respect to
    > past, future and present.

    </div>

[^10]: Compare this passage from J.P. Sartre – Existentialism is
    Humanism, chapter on ‘Freedom and Responsibility’: Yet I find an
    absolute responsibility for the fact that my facticity (here the
    fact of my birth) is directly inapprehensible and even
    inconceivable, for this fact of my birth never appears as a brute
    fact but always across a projective reconstruction of my for-itself.
    I am ashamed of being born or I rejoice over it, or in attempting to
    get rid of my life I affirm that I live and I assume this life as
    bad. Thus in a certain sense I choose to be born. This choice itself
    is integrally affected with facticity since I am not able not to
    choose, but this facticity in turn will appear only in so far as I
    surpass it toward my ends. Thus facticity is everywhere, but
    inapprehensible; I never encounter anything except my
    responsibility. That is why I can not ask, “Why was I born?” or
    curse the day of my birth or declare that I did not ask to be born,
    for these various attitudes towards my birth – i.e., toward the fact
    that I realize a presence in the world – are absolutely nothing else
    but ways of assuming this birth in full responsibility and of making
    it mine.

[^11]: This can be stated even more precisely: the temporal things
    (events in time) are possible only because there is an atemporal
    structure (nature of time) – time is secondary to one’s experience.
    Hence, the p.s. is said to be akālika, ‘timeless’. (Cf. Ñāṇavīra
    Thera, Notes on Dhamma, NP. & FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE). That is why,
    in the Sammādiṭṭhi Sutta, M. 9, we can see that a Noble disciple
    can, by understanding ‘being’, ‘birth’ or ‘ageing-and-death’
    respectively, come to the same result – complete freedom from
    suffering, arahatship. P.s. can be understood by understanding all
    or any of its “pairs”, since each of them represent, or rather are,
    the principle of simultaneous dependent origination – ‘when this,
    this is’ (imasmiṃ sati idaṃ hoti).

[^12]: We are not interested in the conclusions (or lack of them, as
    Ven. Ñāṇavīra would say) they drew from the method itself.

[^13]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op. cit., NP., para. 9 & 10. This ‘somehow’
    is important to note. If a puthujjana, who is not satisfied with the
    idea of birth being something which occurred in his past, admits
    that there has to be some other way in which ‘birth’ can be present,
    and if he admits that he doesn’t see that way, he might make the
    effort to find it out, and than eventually see it.

[^14]: “Husserl attempts to make the natural attitude descriptively
    evident by pointing out that our everyday way of going about our
    business—dealing with things of all sorts, other people, engaged in
    scientific activities, recreation, and so on – involves various
    modalities of”belief.” I simply take for granted that what I am
    dealing with exists and is, more or less, as it presents itself as
    being. Furthermore, “other actual objects are there for me as
    determinate, as more or less well known, without being themselves
    perceived or, indeed, present in any other mode of intuition”
    (Husserl 1982: 51)—that is, they belong within a co-intended horizon
    of “indeterminate actuality” (Husserl 1982:52).”—‘The Blackwell
    Companion to Phenomenology and Existentialism’, Husserlian
    Phenomenology (by Simon Crowell), p. 19.

[^15]: Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, translated by J. Macquarrie and
    E.S. Robinson. London: SCM Press, 1962, p. 25.

[^16]: A rather inspired observation of Walter Kaufmann, a distinguished
    Nietzsche scholar and translator, in his book Existentialism from
    Dostoevsky to Sartre, p. 46: “…perhaps the most compassionate and
    venerable of all mortals, the Buddha. . . \[had said that\] all
    man’s alibis are unacceptable: no gods are responsible for his
    condition; no original sin; no heredity and no environment; no race,
    no caste, no father, and no mother; no wrong-headed education, no
    governess, no teacher; not even an impulse or a disposition, a
    complex or a childhood trauma. Man is free; but his freedom does not
    look like the glorious liberty of the Enlightenment; it is no longer
    the gift of God. Once again, man stands alone in the universe,
    responsible for his condition, likely to remain in a lowly state,
    but free to reach above the stars.”

[^17]: “There is fruit and result of good and bad action…”, i.e.: “I am
    responsible for what I do”. Similarly, “there are… recluses and
    brahmins who have realised for themselves the direct knowledge…”
    means “Freedom from suffering is possible, and if I don’t pursue it,
    I, myself, am responsible for that. By not pursuing it I am
    responsible for remaining there where suffering can arise—I am
    responsible for my suffering.”

[^18]: “It is far better for a man to understand that he does not
    understand the Dhamma, than it is for him to believe falsely that he
    does understand it. The former attitude may encourage progress, the
    latter can only obstruct it.”—CtP, pp. 57-58.

[^19]: For more on the everyday phenomenon of ‘inauthenticity’ see
    Hedigger, Being and Time, and J-P. Sartre, Being and Nothingess,
    particularly the chapter on ‘Bad Faith’. See also the following
    lines from Kierkegaard’s Concluding Unscientific Postscript (p.
    311): “Science organizes the moments of subjectivity within a
    knowledge of them, and this knowledge is assumed to be the highest
    stage, and all knowledge is an abstraction which annuls existence, a
    taking of the objects of knowledge out of existence. In existence,
    however, such a principle does not hold. If thought speaks
    deprecatingly of the imagination, imagination in its turn speaks
    deprecatingly of thought; and likewise with the feeling. The task is
    not to exalt the one at the expense of the other, but to give them
    an equal status, to unify them in simultaneity; the medium in which
    they are unified is existence.”

[^20]: Ven. Ñāṇavīra observes: “There is, however, another point: an
    oriented world (which is the meaning of loka in the Suttas) is the
    correlative of a point of view (there is a SN Sutta that
    specifically identifies the world with the eye, ear, nose, and so
    on), and consequently to deny self is to deny the world, and to
    assert self is to assert the world (so loko so attā). Thus we have
    the following scheme: Sassatavāda Assert a point of view; Asserts
    self— atthi attāti; Assert the world; Denies the objective existence
    of things— sabbaṃ natthīti Is an Idealist (Bradley, Berkeley)
    Uccedavāda Denies a point of view; Denies self— natthi attāti;
    Denies the world; Asserts the objective existence of things— sabbaṃ
    atthīti Is a Realist (Stebbing, Russell) If this analysis is correct
    it would explain why a scientist, though apparently asserting the
    permanence of the Universe, is, in fact, an ucchedavādin—the
    Universe he asserts is without a point of view, and is the negation
    of the world (= loka).”—StP, p. 186. Also, cf. DN 2, in particular
    the Ajita Kesakambalin’s response.

[^21]: Cf. StP, p. 323.

[^22]: Obviously things can be a bit more complex than this, inasmuch as
    these opposite views have a lot in common as Merleau-Ponty observes:
    “We pass from absolute objectivity to absolute subjectivity, but
    this second idea is not better than the first and is upheld only
    against it, which means by it. The affinity between intellectualism
    and empiricism is thus much less obvious and much more deeply rooted
    than is commonly thought. It arises not only from the
    anthropological definition of sensation used equally by both, but
    from the fact that both persist in the natural or dogmatic attitude,
    and the survival of sensation in intellectualism is merely a sign of
    this dogmatism. Intellectualism accepts as completely valid the idea
    of truth and the idea of being in which the formative work of
    consciousness culminates and is embodied, and its alleged reflection
    consists in positing as powers of the subject all that is required
    to arrive at these ideas. The natural attitude, by throwing me into
    the world of things, gives me the assurance of apprehending a ‘real’
    beyond appearance, the ‘true’ beyond illusion.”—Merleau-Ponty,
    Phenomenology of Perception, p. 45.

[^23]: “To have faith in the Reality of the ‘external world’, whether
    rightly or wrongly; to”prove” this Reality for it, whether
    adequately or inadequately; to presuppose it, whether explicitly or
    not—attempts such as these which have not mastered their own basis
    with full transparency, presuppose a subject which is proximally
    worldless or unsure of its world, and which must, at bottom, first
    assure itself of a world. Thus, from the very beginning,
    Being-in-a-world is disposed to “take things” in some way
    \[Auffassen\], to suppose, to be certain, to have faith—a way of
    behaving which itself is always a founded mode of
    Being-in-the-world. The ‘problem of Reality’ in the sense of the
    question whether an external world is present-at-hand and whether
    such world can be proved, turns out to be an impossible one, not
    because its consequences lead to inextricable impasses, but because
    the very entity which serves as its theme, is one which, as it were,
    repudiates any such formulation of the question. Our task is not to
    prove that an ‘external world’ is present-at-hand or to show how it
    is present-at-hand, but to point out why Dasein, as
    Being-in-the-world, has the tendency to bury the ‘external world’ in
    nullity ‘epistemologically’ before going on to prove it. The reason
    for this lies in Dasein’s falling and in the way in which the
    primary understanding of Being has been diverted to Being as
    presence-at-hand—a diversion which is motivated by that falling
    itself.”—Heidegger, op. cit. p. 250.

[^24]: “Behaviour is thus hidden by the reflex, the elaboration and
    patterning of stimuli, by a longitudinal theory of nervous
    functioning, which establishes a theoretical correspondence between
    each element of the situation and an element of the reaction…”The
    traditional notion of sensation was not a concept born of
    reflection, but a late product of thought directed towards objects,
    the last element in the representation of the world, the furthest
    removed from its original source, and therefore the most unclear.
    Inevitably science, in its general effort towards objectification,
    evolved a picture of the human organism as a physical system
    undergoing stimuli which were themselves identified by their
    physico-chemical properties, and tried to reconstitute actual
    perception on this basis, and to close the circle of scientific
    knowledge by discovering the laws governing the production of
    knowledge itself, by establishing an objective science of
    subjectivity…“—Merleau-Ponty, op. cit. pp. 8, & 12.

[^25]: Things that are not explainable through the observational methods
    of inductive sciences.

[^26]: “The theory of sensation, which builds up all knowledge out of
    determinate qualities, offers us objects purged of all ambiguity,
    pure and absolute, the ideal rather than the real themes of
    knowledge.”—Merleau-Ponty, op. cit. p. 13.

[^27]: A reader might notice here the discrepancy between what I’ve just
    said and the views one can find in Heidegger’s or Sartre’s works.
    These philosophers maintain the notion (in different degrees) of the
    separation between my being, i. e. the ‘I’, and being of things, the
    objects of the experience which ‘I’ encounters. For example Sartre
    developed a fundamental division of being-in-itself and
    being-for-itself, which he then tried, and consequently failed, to
    reconcile in Being and Nothingess. In-itself is not more real than
    for-itself, (i. e. ‘me’ or ‘\[my\] consciousness’), and the reverse
    is also true; in order for it to exist it requires for-itself, as
    much as for-itself requires the in-itself. And it is not possible,
    in good faith, to think of or regard the in-itself independently of
    consciousness, nor consciousness independently of the in-itself, not
    even in one’s imagination. ‘Matter’, rūpa, needs consciousness in
    order to find its footing in appearance, without it, it is
    inconceivable. (Cf. the mutually dependent relationship between
    nāmarūpa and viññāṇa.) In brief: whenever there are things, there is
    me; whenever there is me, there are things. (Hence one has to
    understand sabbe dhamma anatta—all things are not-self.) Whether it
    is ‘being’ of things that we are looking at, or my ‘being’, the
    point is that there is ‘being’—bhava is there. This is also why, the
    reader will notice I use ‘existence’ and ‘being’ interchangeably.
    Whether it is ‘mine’, or not, whether it is personal or impersonal,
    large or small, visible or invisible, far or near, any ‘being’
    whatsoever means that bhava is there; it is, it exists. As long as
    that is the case, ‘I’ (or at least some degree of the conceit ‘I
    am’) will be present.

[^28]: NoD, ATTĀ.

[^29]: “…the phenomenon remains, for”to appear” supposes in essence
    somebody to whom to appear. “—J.—P. Sartre, Being and Nothingness,
    translated by Hazel E. Barnes. London: Methuen, 1957, 1969; New
    York: Philosophical Library, 1957, p. 2.

[^30]: Hence the nature of it also appearing was obscured.

[^31]: Sartre (op. cit. , p. 6) seems to have become aware of this, but
    then chose to disagree: “What determines the being of the appearance
    is the fact that it appears. And since we have restricted reality to
    the phenomenon, we can say of the phenomenon that it is as it
    appears. Why not push the idea to its limit and say that the being
    of the appearance is its appearing? This is simply a way of choosing
    new words to clothe the old”Esse est percipi”of Berkeley… It seems
    that the famous formula of Berkeley cannot satisfy us—for two
    essential reasons, one concerning the nature of percipi, the other
    that of the percipere.” Sartre then goes on to construe
    consciousness into a form of an ‘empty’ absolute which is “pure
    ‘appearance’ in the sense that it exists only to the degree to which
    appears.” (op. cit., p. 12). There is no question of things existing
    to the degree they appear, however there is no such thing as ‘pure
    appearance’ in the sense of appearance independent of that which has
    appeared, since every appearance has to be appearance of something.
    Even if someone says: “Pure appearance”—that designation of that
    “pure appearance” is that which stands for that which is “pure
    appearance”, thus that “pure appearance” is not pure—Sartre’s “empty
    absolute” is thus contradictio in terminis.

[^32]: “The first being which we meet in our ontological inquiry is the
    being of the appearance. Is it itself an appearance?… In other
    words, is the being which discloses itself to me, which appears to
    me, of the same nature as the being of existents which appear to
    me?”—Sartre, op. cit. p. 4.

[^33]: “…the being of the phenomenon can not be reduced to the
    phenomenon of being.”—Sartre, op. cit. p. 6.

[^34]: “The puthujjana’s experience is (saṅkhāra-)dukkha from top to
    bottom, and the consequence is that he has no way of knowing dukkha
    for himself; for however much he ‘steps back’ from himself in a
    reflexive effort he still takes dukkha with him…”“—CtP, p. 482; and
    on the p. 38 of the same work:”The Dhamma gives the puthujjana the
    outside view of avijjā, which is inherently unobtainable for him by
    unaided reflexion (in the ariyasāvaka this view has, as it were,
    ‘taken’ like a graft, and is perpetually available.”

[^35]: Upādāna is defined by the PTS Pali-English Dictionary as
    follows: 1) lit. substratum by means of which an active process is
    kept alive or going; fuel, supply, provision… 2) ‘drawing upon’,
    grasping, taking up…; Assumption, assuming according to Chambers
    Concise Dictionary means: to adopt, to take in, to take upon
    oneself, to take for granted; \[Latin term is assūměre, assumptum:
    (ad) to (sūměre) take\]. The nature of the assumption in general,
    can be described as follows: the assumption takes its object for
    granted, and it does so without having a knowledge of whether that
    thing which is being ‘taken up’ actually is in the way that it is
    taken up. As a matter of fact, not having a knowledge of this is the
    fundamental prerequisite for the assumption to manifest, because if
    the object is known for what it is, there wouldn’t be a need to
    assume it for what it is. Knowledge and assumption (vijjā and
    upādāna) are mutually exclusive. However, upādāna is there (as
    pañc’upādānakkhandā) which means that the assumption of what the
    five aggregates are, preceeds that which five aggregates are. In
    this way the beginingless avijjā puts the assumption first, as
    something “in front”, something more fundamental, that the five
    aggregates which are taken up. This is done in direct violation of
    the fact that upādāna cannot be anywhere apart from the five
    aggregates, that it actually requires them for its existence. Thus,
    assumption assumes priority over that which is already there. That
    ‘assumed assumption’ (or taking for granted that which is taken for
    granted) becomes the puthujjana’s ‘norm’ of things’ existence, it
    ‘measures’ them according what it thinks they are, not for what they
    are. The extent of the assumption determines the extent of this
    measure (i. e. the existence)— upādānapaccāya bhavo. (Cf. Sartre,
    op. cit., p. 2: “…then the appearance becomes full positivity; its
    essence is an ‘appearing’ which is no longer opposed to being but on
    the contrary is the measure of it.”)

[^36]: He assumes: “It is the same; it is different; it is
    both-the-same-and-different; it is neither-the-same-nor-different.”

[^37]: “Craving, however, is a gratuitous (though beginningless)
    parasite on the intentional structure described here, and its
    necessity is not to be deduced from the necessity of intention in
    all experience. Intention does not imply craving—a hard thing to
    understand!”—NoD, CETANĀ.

[^38]: For more on this subject see CtP, L. 93, pp. 351f. It is not
    possible to clarify the point any further, simply because of the
    nature of the subject. When one reflects, in a strict sense (i.e.
    reflexion), one is *aware*. What is then present in one’s experience
    is hierarchy of awareness *together* with those things that were
    reflected upon, i.e. revealed by reflexion.

[^39]: *NoD*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE , Static Aspect, §16.

[^40]: *Yena yena hi maññanti, tato taṃ hoti aññathā*, “In whatever
    terms they conceive it, it turns into something other than that.”
    (Sn 3.12)

[^41]: This is achieved in the practice of *jhāna*, which, however, will
    not concern us here.

[^42]: *NoD*, FUNDAMENTAL STRUCTURE , Static Aspect, §16.

[^43]: “It is in the nature of the *pañc’upādānakkhandhā* to press for
    recognition, in one way or another, as ‘self’.” (*NoD*, PARAMATTHA
    SACCA , §6)

[^44]: One does not see that the ‘owner’ depends upon his ownership.

[^45]: By an ‘indirect approach’ we imply seeing the nature of
    superimposition. As it was outlined above, the *direct* approach has
    been taken in this essay as *linear*, and as such it is incapable of
    reaching and understanding the hierarchy of awareness in a proper
    way (see the fifth paragraph). The *indirect approach* refers to
    seeing that with the presence of *what*, does *this* arise, and with
    the absence of *what*, does this cease. In other words, this is a
    phenomenological approach, or an approach founded upon *sati*,
    whereby the immediate things of experience are *not directly*
    followed at its initial appearance.

[^46]: View originating from the Self.

[^47]: Only an *arahat* is completely free from this pressing nature of
    experience. The case with other *sekhā* is that ‘pressure’ varies in
    degrees.

[^48]: Which, as I will attempt to show in this essay, is
    over-simplified.

[^49]: Translated by Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi, Wisdom
    Publications, Third edition 2005.

[^50]: Preferences and values being perhaps too coarse yet a good enough
    example of this.

[^51]: Uddhesavibhanga Sutta, MN 138. \[iii,225\]

[^52]: They would only do so in the arahant’s case.

[^53]: Madhupiṇḍika Sutta, MN 18; translation taken from The Middle
    Length Discourses of the Buddha, Bhikkhu Ñāṇamoli and Bhikkhu Bodhi,
    Wisdom Publications, Third edition 2005, p. 202 \[i,109\].

[^54]: Compare also the nature of the five hindrances. It takes the
    first jhāna for one to be able to suppress them, which speaks for
    itself, since such strength of one’s concentration is enough for
    becoming an arahant (if there is wisdom, of course).

[^55]: op. cit. p. 202.

[^56]: Compare Ven. Sāriputta’s answer to Ven. Udāyi when the later
    asked him what is there that is pleasant when there is nothing felt
    \[in nibbāna\]—“Just this is pleasant, friend, that herein there is
    nothing felt”, AN iv,414.

[^57]: Ñāṇavīra Thera took sabbatopabhaṃ to be sabbato-apahaṃ (from
    apahoti, a+pahoti), in which case this compound would be synonymous
    with anidassanaṃ, ‘non-indicative’ or ‘not-producing’ (Self). (Cf.
    Ñāṇavīra Thera—Clearing the Path (2010), ‘Note on Paṭiccasamuppāda’,
    footnote j, p.28). Whether he was right or wrong in reading it like
    this, it is clear here that either way the context is scarcely
    affected—the infinity of consciousness does not indicate Self, does
    not produce Self, and it is fundamentally lucid, radiant, and
    unobstructed.

[^58]: Cf. MN 38.

[^59]: This also indicates that the states of ‘boundlessness’,
    ‘infinity’ and similar that are mentioned in the Suttas are not
    exclusively reserved for “meditation attainments”, as they are
    commonly regarded.

[^60]: Cf. “There is just this body and name-and-form externally…”—SN
    12.19.

[^61]: “Craving, however, is a gratuitous (though beginningless)
    parasite on the intentional structure described here, and its
    necessity is not to be deduced from the necessity of intention in
    all experience. Intention does not imply craving—a hard thing to
    understand! But if intention did imply craving, arahatta would be
    out of the question, and there would be no escape.”—Ñāṇavīra Thera,
    op. cit., footnote f, p. 56.

[^62]: Cf. MN 44.

[^63]: The reader might notice that Ñāṇavīra Thera in ‘Fundamental
    Structure’ (op.cit. p. 107) refers to the endurance of a thing as
    ‘eternal’. This structural ‘eternity’ is what is meant here by
    ‘infinity’. It is just how one decides to designate these terms. If
    we were to choose the term ‘eternal’ to describe the property of the
    structure, we would additionally have to qualify it by saying: “A
    thing endures for ever. A thing is eternal… until it ceases.” I,
    personally, prefer ‘infinite’ so that the distinction between the
    inherent nature of the arisen experience (infinity) becomes apparent
    from the puthujjana’s appropriation of it (eternity).

[^64]: Cf. AN 3.115 & SN 35.202.

[^65]: Cf. nibbānadhātu

[^66]: For these very reasons the Buddha was able to “rediscover” the
    path which lay there. For more cf. SN 12.65.

[^67]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Clearing the Path, SAÑÑĀ, §2.

[^68]: Or how to not-conceive ‘that because of which’ perception is.

[^69]: Thinking it in isolation from the present experience (i.e. from
    perception and consciousness) would amount to this. Since the
    separation cannot actually occur (not even in one’s imagination),
    all one can do is assume that which is different between those
    three.

[^70]: The \[sense of\] independence is the inevitable outcome of the
    presence of the assumption in one’s experience. It is not therefore
    accidental that one’s sense of Self is always regarded as an
    extra-temporal and changeless, i.e. independent (from the rest of
    the experience). Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op.cit., ATTĀ, §1 and L.147,
    §3.

[^71]: Thus, because of this assumption, one feels the thing, not one’s
    feelings; one perceives the thing, not one’s perception. By doing so
    one conceives things different to what they are, and when those
    things change one suffers.

[^72]: Cf. my essay Determining Determinations. ‘That because of which’
    \[feeling, perception, consciousness are\] is assumed as ‘that
    which’ feeling, perception, consciousness ‘are’.

[^73]: “It is not possible to separate them and by separating them point
    out the difference…” –MN 43.

[^74]: Cf. MN 43.

[^75]: Or cross into each other’s domains.

[^76]: All of these are forms of identity.

[^77]: Cf. my essay [The Infinity of
    Mind](#nyanamoli_essay8_not_perceiving_the_feeling.md__the-infinity-of-the-mind).

[^78]: By understanding this structural ‘indifference’, one feels
    indifferent to the whole structure-which is what upekkhā is.

[^79]: It is the nature of the superimposition that breeds this
    indifference, since concern is in its nature always in relation to
    something.

[^80]: Disagreeable (or agreeable, or neutral)

[^81]: In the past, or possible in the future, or standing there in the
    present.

[^82]: Matter matters, feeling feels, perception perceives,
    determinations determine, consciousness cognizes.

[^83]: Upādānapaccayā bhavo.

[^84]: ‘Name’ assumes existence in ‘matter’-‘name’ exists.

[^85]: ‘Matter’ finds footing in ‘name’-‘matter’ exists.Cf. DN 11.

[^86]: “It would be as wrong to say ‘a feeling is perceived’ as it would
    ‘a percept is felt’ (which mix up saññā and vedanā); but it is quite
    in order to say ‘a feeling, a percept, (that is, a felt thing, a
    perceived thing) is cognized’, which simply means that a feeling or
    a percept is present (as, indeed, they both are in all
    experience—see Majjhima v,3 (M.i,293)). Strictly speaking, then,
    what is cognized is nāmarūpa, whereas what is perceived (or felt) is
    saññā (or vedanā), i.e. only nāma. This distinction can be shown
    grammatically. Vijānāti, to cognize, is active voice in sense
    (taking an objective accusative): consciousness cognizes a
    phenomenon (nāmarūpa); consciousness is always consciousness of
    something. Sañjānāti, to perceive, (or vediyati, to feel) is middle
    voice in sense (taking a cognate accusative): perception perceives
    \[a percept\] (or feeling feels \[a feeling\]). Thus we should say
    ‘a blue thing (= a blueness), a painful thing (= a pain), is
    cognized’, but ‘blue is perceived’ and ‘pain is felt’. (In the
    Suttas generally, due allowance is to be made for the elasticity in
    the common usage of words. But in certain passages, and also in
    one’s finer thinking, stricter definition may be
    required.)”-Ñāṇavīra Thera, Clearing the Path, 2010, p. 92.

[^87]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Seeking The Path, 2010, p. 40, §§17-18:
    “\[Four mahābhutā\]…will always be just below our feet.”

[^88]: Thus, ‘matter’ can never be perceived, but it can “find footing”
    in that which is perceived (or felt, or intended).

[^89]: He delights in his own creation, because it is his own creation.

[^90]: If one is not to conceive that ‘matter’ because of which there is
    a percept of matter, one would not conceive oneself as that because
    of which there is a perceiver and conceiver of the world. Cf. SN
    35.116: The eye… ear… nose… tongue… body… mind… is that in the world
    by which one is a perceiver and conceiver of the world. Also,
    cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op.cit. p. 298: And when shall we ‘not be that
    by which’? … the Buddha tells us: it is when, for us, in the seen
    there shall be just the seen, and so with the heard, the sensed, and
    the cognized. And when in the seen is there just the seen? When the
    seen is no longer seen as ‘mine’ (etaṃ mama) or as ‘I’ (eso’ham
    asmi) or as ‘my self’ (eso me attā): in brief, when there is no
    longer, in connexion with the senses, the conceit ‘I am’, by which
    ‘I am a conceiver of the world’.

[^91]: That’s how the sense of the ‘mine’ leads to the sense of ‘Self’.

[^92]: Cf. Bāhiya Sutta, Ud. 10/8.

[^93]: “Wisdom is to be developed…” – MN 43.

[^94]: If it were fundamentally subject to one’s conceivings, freedom
    from conceivings would not be possible. Cf. my [The Infinity of the
    Mind](#nyanamoli_essay9_resistance_and_designation.md__the-infinity-of-the-mind)

[^95]: “…consciousness is to be understood”. – MN 43.

[^96]: Simultaneous, superimposed, utterly indifferent to each other.

[^97]: Cf. MN 43.

[^98]: Cf. Notes on DN 15.

[^99]: Now is probably the time to mention that none of this, nor
    paragraphs to follow, can be grasped intellectually by the reader.
    Things that are described here are not to be made sense of in a
    rationally or philosophically satisfying way, but to be seen in a
    certain order that they arise in one’s experience. Hence the
    deliberate repetitive style which aligns things in the order they
    are to be understood (which is also the reason why the Suttas are in
    that form). Also, refraining from a too particular and established
    terminology was intentional, since that would most likely lead a
    reader to assume that he already knows what those terms refer to.

[^100]: Cf. Khanda Saṃyutta viii,7.

[^101]: And not that because of which feeling, perception and cognizance
    are there.

[^102]: “There is, monks, (a) non-born, non-become, non-made, non
    determined. If, monks, there were not that non-born, non-become,
    non-made, non-determined, an escape from (the) born, become, made,
    determined would not be discernible. But, because there is (a)
    non-born, non-become, non-made, non-determined escape from (the)
    born, become, made, determined is discernible.”—Nibbāna Sutta, Ud.
    8/3. the structure of the experience fundamentally be appropriated,
    freedom from the appropriation is possible.

[^103]: “From nibbāna, he has a percept of nibbāna; having known nibbāna
    from nibbāna, he conceives nibbāna, he conceives in nibbāna, he
    conceives out of nibbāna, he conceives ‘My’ nibbāna, he delights
    nibbāna. Why is that? He has not fully understood it, I say.”—MN 1.
    Also cf. MN 102, \[237\].

[^104]: One knows that whether one intends toward, away, both or
    neither, in regard to that because of which intentions are there,
    that because of which intentions are there remains there, regardless
    of the intention in regard to it. By understanding that it is
    fundamentally inaccessible to one’s intentions, one ceases to crave
    towards it with those intentions, one ceases to assume it through
    those intentions, since neither intentions nor that which directly
    stands upon them, namely-one’s assumption-could access it. And one
    knows that. \[‘Ignorant intentions’ are simply craving, which leads
    to ‘assumption’-taṇhapaccayā upādāna. Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, op.cit.,
    p.56, footnote f.: “Intention does not imply craving-a hard thing to
    understand!”\]).

[^105]: Does not “stand for it” in one’s experience, does not “represent
    it”, does not “manifest it”.

[^106]: Cannot be ‘accessed’ by it.

[^107]: The assumption is made redundant.

[^108]: If one thinks “there is that because of which intentions are
    there, which is inaccessible to those intentions”, that thought
    ‘stands for’ that because of which intentions are there, and through
    that thought one assumes access to that inaccessible-inaccessible
    exists. If one knows that regardless of what a thought or intention
    stand for, it can never “step outside” of its nature-one can only
    think one’s thoughts (perception perceived) or intend one’s
    intentions, not that because of which that thought/intention are
    there-one ceases to assume that which that intention stands for,
    because of which intention is there. Thus, intention remains, while
    “attempts to access” fade away, since one sees them as pointless and
    loses interest in them. When those “attempts” are thoroughly
    subdued, ‘the assumption’ of that which was assumed “accessible”
    (through those very attempts) disappears too, never to return.

[^109]: The only reason why assumption can be made redundant, is because
    it was redundant in the first place. Not knowing that it was
    redundant, makes it necessary, until it ceases to be so. And the
    reason why assumption presents itself as necessary is because it
    assumes that which is necessary in one’s experience, namely-the five
    aggregates. Thus, the five aggregates, which are necessary in one’s
    experience, come to exist, through the assuming of them as that
    which is necessary in one’s experience. But since they are necessary
    in one’s experience, assuming them as necessary in one’s experience
    is not necessary. But until one knows that, that assumption will
    exist.

[^110]: Which is why in order to correctly do any of the practices found
    in the Suttas, one needs the right view first.

[^111]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Clearing the Path, p. 195.

[^112]: As recommended in SN 54:9.

[^113]: Whether it is “I am breathing in,” or “I shall breathe in,”
    through mindful repetition the “I” begins to stand out, so to speak,
    and when paired with understanding, the more it “stands out,” the
    less it is mine.

[^114]: Cf. MN 10.

[^115]: This should not be mistaken as “sensations”. See below.

[^116]: The same principle applies to the other foundations, namely –
    feelings, mind and thoughts.

[^117]: That which is simultaneously present, but “less” there, less
    actual.

[^118]: Or: “Right in front of us”; to “take them up.”

[^119]: This doesn’t mean that any (i.e. fall sorts of contradictory)
    practice of meditation is being endorsed here. This is because, for
    a puthujjana, no matter how much effort he makes, if the practice he
    has chosen or been given is inherently wrong, no right results can
    come from it. One does not accidentally become sotāpanna, it doesn’t
    “happen to one” as a blessing. One builds it up, develops it and
    attains it through “manly efforts,” as the Suttas often say, and
    because it was not given to one, it cannot be taken away.

[^120]: Which inevitably acquired countless mystical connotations that
    they maintain to this day.

[^121]: Cf. SN 54:8.

[^122]: Cf. SN 40:1.

[^123]: Cf. MN 119.

[^124]: Cf. SN 54:8.

[^125]: Cf. Sn 1:3,21 (verse 55).

[^126]: Cf. Ñāṇavīra Thera, Clearing the Path, p. 75.

[^127]: In other words, it is impossible to perform an action which in
    and by itself would be able to overcome the nature of action, which
    is the whole point of the Buddhist practice: overcoming kamma.
    Through action, good or bad or neutral, all one accomplishes is the
    maintenance of the nature of action: by acting, one remains bound by
    action. If this would not be the case, the Buddha and the Dhamma
    would not be required for the freedom from suffering, and all one
    would have to do is simply perform certain things and by doing so,
    automatically reach nibbāna, or even better: all one would have to
    do is choose to be in nibbāna and one would attain it.

[^128]: And one also comes to realize that for as long as one is alive,
    experience is always there, and one doesn’t have to do anything in
    order for it to be so. And this is where the real purpose of a
    meditation technique becomes apparent: one is after a particular
    type of experience (regarded as more desirable and lofty) as a form
    of replacement or escape from another type of experience (regarded
    as undesirable and unpleasant). “I want to experience this, I don’t
    want to experience that (or lack-of-this). Thus, all one is trying
    to do is experience pleasant by directly displacing unpleasant, i.e.
    one wants to fulfill one’s immediate desire. For as long as one
    remains concerned and puts value on the particulars of an
    experience, the nature of it will remain unknown. This is the reason
    why any meditation of this kind is a meditation that is utterly
    within the sensual domain and cannot go beyond it, which is what MN
    108 (iii, 14) refers to.

[^129]: People themselves might often struggle to reconcile the nature
    of meditation techniques with the nature of the Buddha’s Teaching,
    but they usually end up ignoring this because it feels like the
    immediate application of a technique is helping them and makes them
    feel better. The problem with this is that they, as puthujjanas,
    have no criteria to determine what “helpful” really is. Thus, they
    just end up following their own feelings and assumptions again, but
    this time on the pretext of Buddhism and spiritual practice.

[^130]: One can be ignorant of the phenomenological nature only because
    that nature is there, present.

[^131]: Cf. my essay Not Perceiving the Feeling (Meanings, p. 43) where
    I said that it is the feeling that feels, perception that perceives
    and thought that thinks (I am paraphrasing).

[^132]: This is a type of structural indifference and this can be
    understood in terms of the superimposition of the respective domains
    of body (matter) and thoughts. Both of these domains are
    simultaneously present, but they don’t interfere – they are
    “indifferent” to each other. Furthermore, it is not just that they
    don’t interfere, it is that they cannot interfere, even if one is to
    want it. This principle actually applies to the whole experience,
    namely: the five aggregates. Crossing from one domain into another
    is structurally inconceivable, but as long as one does not fully
    understand that, by not-understanding one conceives it. For more on
    this cf. my essays The Infinity of the Mind and Not Perceiving the
    Feeling (Meanings, p. 39 and p.43).

[^133]: And this very indifference was obscured through the assumption
    of ‘body’ (i.e. matter) in one’s thoughts. Cf. Resistance and
    Designation (Meanings, p. 47).

[^134]:
    > “Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints occurs in
    > dependence on the first jhāna…”

    > – AN 9:36

[^135]: This is why the correct practice of mindfulness results in
    higher establishments of mind (*samadhi*). For example, this is
    where mind surmounts the fundamental “generality” of form, by the
    way of surmounting the generality of earth, water, fire and air.
    Also, there is a reason that the order of elements always stays the
    same. They are have a particular structural order of their
    generality. And one can discern them in that order only.

[^136]: That’s also why this type of attention is said by the Buddha to
    be one of the necessary pre-requisites for the arising of the Right
    view.

[^137]:
    > “…or mindfulness that”there is body” is simply established in him
    > to the extent necessary for the final knowledge.”

    > – MN 10, *Satipatthana Sutta*

[^138]:
    > “Unification of mind, friend Visakha, is samadhi. The four
    > foundations of mindfulness are the basis of samadhi. The four
    > right kind of striving are the equipment of samadhi. The
    > repetition, the development and cultivation of those same states
    > is what development of samadhi is.”

    > – MN 44, *Culavedalla Sutta*

[^139]: Experience as a whole, the
    ‘foreground-without-focusing-on-particular-object-witin-it’.

[^140]: Sensuality is *always* concerned with the particular content of
    the experience. Particular *sight*, *sound*, *smell*, *taste*,
    *touch*. Thus, mindfulness of the peripheral domain to the
    particular foreground, can result in overcoming it.

[^141]: Hence the fully developed knowledge that came from the Right
    View, results in freeing an individual from his actions (*kamma*).
    Full understanding of the nature of the “choice” as “peripheral”,
    removes the gratuitous *assumption* (*upadana*) of necessity of the
    “Chooser” i.e. the Self. Understanding the choice or intentional
    intention (*cetana*) frees oneself from choosing (i.e. acting).

[^142]: ‘you’re gonna have to serve somebody, yes indeed’ - Bob Dylan

[^143]: The requirement is pretty much that such a community should be a
    community of noble disciples; i.e. people who possess the Right
    View, one of the characteristics of which is ‘seeing right as right
    and wrong as wrong’; another characteristic being that all not only
    have the same goal - liberation from birth, death and suffering- but
    the same understanding of how to achieve that goal. Note that this
    is absolutely NOT the same as a cult, in which people voluntarily
    deny their own individual point of view in favour of that of the
    group and the leader - in this, rather, each person has individually
    come to an understanding of certain fundamental principles that are
    timeless and universal, and each of them are individually also
    defined as ‘independent of others.’ Unlike a cult, for such
    individuals it is irrelevant whether they are alone or in a group,
    aside from practical convenience and similar considerations. But
    because their understanding pertains to something universal, they
    will naturally be ‘on the same page’ at least as far as important
    things go, without needing very much in the way of micro-managed
    rules to govern their behavior.

[^144]: Actually, if this is taken to its conclusion such an authority
    can’t really be called ‘an authority’ in the usual sense of the
    word. The Buddha being the obvious example that comes to mind, who
    specifically stated on several occasions that it was not up to him
    whether people followed his instructions or not; and he particularly
    did not think of himself as an authority over the monks.

    > But Ananda, what does the Sangha expect from me? I have taught the
    > Dhamma, Ananda, having made no secret opposed to the public. The
    > Perfected One has no closed teacher’s fist with regard to
    > teachings. If anyone thinks, ‘I shall take charge of the Sangha,’
    > or ‘the Sangha should refer to me,’ let him make some statement
    > about the Sangha; but the Perfected One does not think in this
    > way.)

    > —DN 16.
