---
archive_url: "https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20230919%20-%20336hh%20-%20Overcoming%20the%20sexual%20urge.mp3"
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
category: Transcriptions
date: 2023-09-19
description: a summarized transcription
doc_url: "https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/300"
episode: 336
layout: post
title: Overcoming the Sexual Urge
youtube_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1DcXTYmbeA"
---

a summarized transcription

by **Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero**

[\[video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D1DcXTYmbeA) [\[audio\]](https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20230919%20-%20336hh%20-%20Overcoming%20the%20sexual%20urge.mp3)

**Q**:

> Venerable Sir, I have been following the practice of “No Fap”,
which involves voluntary refraining from pornography and masturbation.
However, this path has brought me to seek your guidance, because I have
grown wary of mere abstinence. My goal is to find true liberation from
the internal sexual pressure. Despite experiencing increased vitality
through the NoFap practice, I still feel the weight of this pressure
within me. I request your assistance in finding genuine freedom.

**Ajahn Nyanamoli**: The next step is to start discerning the mental
aspects of sensuality and sensual craving. So being celibate, withdrawn
from sensuality, not exposing yourself to unsuitable sights, and so on,
that’s necessary, and now you can start seeing the mental counterparts
of those desires. As discussed in previous videos, it’s important to
note that nobody truly desires sensuality; in fact, these pressures are
unpleasant and painful.

So what is your attitude towards pain now? Having contained your
craving, craving for pleasures, sexuality, and so on—having practiced
sense restraint, and withdrawal—do you now have aversion towards things?
Do you cultivate that aversion? Are you resisting the discomfort of your
body, of your unsatisfied body, unsatisfied by the old habits?

You have to start taming the sensual itch, and the only way you used to
know how to “tame” it is through scratching it. So it’s going to take a
while before the mind stops associating itch with a scratch. But that
can happen, if you stick to it, if you abstain from scratching through
physical sensual behavior, then abstain from scratching by mentally
indulging those thoughts, and then the nature of the itch will become
more apparent, which is that it’s unpleasant and it itches less if it’s
left alone on the level of the mind. That’s where the itch is uprooted.
If you engage with that itch mentally, it translates into a physical
need. But it starts and remains fully rooted on the mental level. So if
you have been withdrawn, not delighting in it mentally, not acting out
physically, you could start seeing that itch for what it is. It’s
slightly uncomfortable, but only from the point of view of wanting to
scratch it. So you must learn how to become peaceful within it. You
learn how to calm within the itch and the need for scratching it
disappears because that is the more instantaneous way of freeing
yourself from the itch. Calm within the itch removes the itch - removes
the pressure. Scratching the itch relieves it on the surface, but makes
you worse on the inside. It only increases the itch which keeps
returning again and again. But, if you remain immovable internally, in
the heart of that itch, it doesn’t itch.

To aid that, contemplate the repulsiveness of things you are attracted
to, the factual repulsiveness. Don’t contemplate them through the itch
and through trying to get rid of the itch, but when you’re not itching,
then bring those things to mind - the repulsive nature that pertains to
your sexual desires and so on. Bodies are generally repulsive, it’s just
that the mind selectively only focuses and picks the signs of the
agreeable shapes and forms and so on, ignoring the disagreeable which is
simultaneously there in it. When the itch is present, you mustn’t be
doing all of this contemplation to get rid of that sexual itch, because
that’s going to become another way of trying to scratch the itch.

**Q**: I think some people who are into this “NoFap” can start hating
the objects that they are attracted to… blaming the objects for the lust
that they have.

**Nm**: Sure, blaming the objects.

**Q**: Hating women or hating the other things that they are sexually
attracted to, hating sensuality, hating the world.

**Nm**: The mind might go that way and you might start acting out of it.
So if you are building aversion towards these things, well that’s fine
in a way, it will subside if you don’t act out of it. So don’t be
expressing that aversion, don’t be trying to act by body, by speech, by
mind, hating, revolving around hate, because that’s not where the
problem was rooted to begin with. It was rooted in you, yourself, not
being developed regarding the itch of your own body.

When experiencing the itch, you needed to scratch it, and you were
finding and developing different ways of scratching it, all rooted in
wanting to get rid of it. So you have to stop trying to get rid of it,
which the questioner did not do, although he did physically restrain
himself with non-masturbation, celibacy, and so on. And now mentally the
weight of that itch is becoming apparent. So now they have to mentally
not allow their thoughts to proliferate and fantasize about these
things, but at the same time, you don’t want to be trying to get rid of
the itch, because the itch is the reference point for your development.
If the itch is obscured, you don’t know if you’re going to be moved by
it or not.

You don’t need to seek the itch, it’s by not seeking the scratching,
that it becomes apparent.

Sometimes people think, “Oh, I need to go and expose myself to
sensuality to see if I’m free.” Well, if you don’t know that you’re
free, it means you’re not free. If you’re not free from doubt regarding
sensuality, it means you are still within sensuality. On the contrary,
you want to expose yourself to the itch of sensuality, by saying no to
the scratching of it.

Sense restraint and virtue reveal the sensual itch. And if you think, “I
don’t feel an itch,” increase the sense restraint, and say no to all
provocative things. And then if there’s truly no pressure of the itch
manifested, you’re free and you wouldn’t be going back to it, because it
was always unpleasant, to begin with. Would you be scratching your wound
once it’s healed and stopped itching? That would be a stupid thing to
do.

**Q**: I think this person is expecting the pressuring itch to disappear
completely.

**Nm**: Yes. So basically the pressure, as I said, is pressured by the
need to scratch. Pressure pressures you on account of your assumed value
of scratching. And that needs to change. You need to recognize that you
should never scratch because it’s dangerous. It’s a decline, it’s a
destruction, it’s a defilement by which you are bound to suffering.

Never scratch it. That in and of itself would train your mind to get
used to the pressure. And when the mind stops expecting the scratch, the
itch will disappear.

You have to not scratch the itch and you have to not try to get rid of
it. Because that becomes another way of trying to scratch it, remove it.
So don’t go towards it, but don’t deny it. Recognize that the pressure
is the measure of what you need to get used to.

Imagine that pressure pressuring you now acutely, have the view - “Let
me live with it and never act out of it. And let’s see what happens.”
Well, what will happen is it will stop pressuring you. As I said the
acuteness of the pressure is because of you still looking past it
towards the scratch of one kind or the other.

**Q**: Lusting after that possible pleasure.

**Nm**: Well exactly, that in and of itself perpetuates the underlying
desire to scratch and the pressure of the itch.

If you’re averse to that pressure, i.e. you want it to go away, to never
be there, that’s already on the same level as desiring to scratch it.
This is good to begin with, because if you didn’t have that you would
not have abstained from masturbation and sexuality and so on. But now
the next step is to realize, “OK, now I can’t get rid of all of this, I
need to train my mind regarding it so that my mind is not moved by it.
Because itch comes from the body being there, being vital, being alive,
being hormonal, being whatever. But how that internal itch of this body
affects my mind, that’s on me.”

Whether your mind is moved by it and projected towards sensual desires
and ideas, or completely indifferent, seeing the danger of sensual
desires and ideas and not going there, then that itch is not an itch,
it’s just an aspect of this body and how it’s experienced.

That’s what the Buddha said, ([Saṁyogasutta AN
7.51](https://suttacentral.net/an7.51)) as long as a man is not
developed internally regarding his own body, he’s not going to overcome
the desire towards the external counterparts of his sexuality. So your
mind needs to be developed regarding your own body I. E. your sexual
itch. And being developed means being unmoved, ceasing to expect the
scratch, and ceasing to expect the itch to go away.

The only experience of absent itch that you know, is the experience of
the aftermath of scratching. And that’s not the absence of an itch,
that’s just numbing the itch that’s still there, numbing the wound that
still hurts. If you abstain from both, scratching it and wishing to get
rid of it, you will learn what freedom from that itch is.

**Q**: The Right endurance, which is the Middle Way, provides immediate
relief from that itch.

**Nm**: Immediate relief from the itch occurs when you see through it
rightly. Eventually, you won’t even need to see through it, as the itch
will no longer be associated with the need to scratch. This means you
will no longer be bothered by the itch.
