---
archive_url: "https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20231024%20-%20341hh%20-%20Abortion%20of%20samsara.mp3"
author: Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero
category: Transcriptions
date: 2023-10-24
description: a summarized transcription
doc_url: "https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/309"
episode: 341
layout: post
title: Abortion of Samsara
youtube_url: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JwKXfM7-p8c"
---

a summarized transcription

by **Ajahn Nyanamoli Thero**

[\[video\]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JwKXfM7-p8c) [\[audio\]](https://archive.org/download/hillside-hermitage-audio-archive/20231024%20-%20341hh%20-%20Abortion%20of%20samsara.mp3)

**Q**:

<div lang="en">

> Bhante, several years ago I underwent an abortion. And although I’ve
> since grown and improved as a person, the burden of my past decision
> still lingers, accompanied by the fear of potential consequences.
> Strangely I don’t mind this lingering guilt, as it serves as a
> constant reminder of my past mistakes and my commitment to not repeat
> them. I hold the belief that abortion is wrong, even though I am
> uncertain about the consciousness of the baby/fetus at that particular
> point. My guilt stems from knowing that I might have destroyed a life.
> Do you think my feelings of shame and guilt are justified? I believe
> they are.

</div>

**Ajahn Nyanamoli**: Yes , absolutely, and it’s good that you are not in
denial, and are actually using your guilt as a context to not make the
same mistake. As for the consequences, well, yes , the consequences of
taking a life have to be experienced at some point. Now, how much of
those karmic consequences would be experienced? Well, you can see from
the *sutta*s that if somebody, say, has taken human life and then
afterwards they made a tremendous effort and developed their mind, freed
it from greed, aversion, delusion, or at least partially, those
consequences would diminish. In other words, the consequences that they
will have to experience would be fairly minuscule in comparison to what
they would have experienced if their mind were not rightly developed.
And when I say rightly developed, I don’t mean you go and sit on a
ten-day nostril watching retreat. I mean you fully start accepting
responsibility for your actions, training your mind to remain unmoved in
face of hindrances, not fueling greed, not fueling aversion, not fueling
the wrong views. Getting the right view is your safety card. If you can
become a *sotāpanna* or more, even better, but at least that, because
the sotāpanna cannot be reborn lower than a human realm, regardless of
the actions and consequences that are waiting for them from what they
did before.

**Q**: I am also not trying to find out if the baby was conscious or not
at the point of abortion?

**Nm**: It’s irrelevant.

**Q**: I am not trying to get rid of my guilt. I am actually finding
value in it.

**Nm**: You’ve recogniz ed that regardless of the answer that you might
get, depending on whom you ask, basically, from your individual point of
view, what comes first is the guilt and the always lingering doubt that
it could have been a life that you have taken. So it doesn’t matter what
science or religion gives you as an answer, “Yes, it was”, or ” No, it
wasn’t.” The fact is, that act in and of itself, from your point of
view, will always remain doubtful, because you cannot verify it.

For example, scientifically, if somebody tells you, “No, there isn’t
consciousness there,” well, it’s a presupposition, or “No, it’s not
conscious.” Again, they can’t verify that either. But the fact that it
could be, is more than enough for you to recognize that killing it
should not have been done, in that sense. So even if the fetus is
unconscious, it’s still a human fetus. From its point of conception, to
the point of death, it’s a human entity, in that sense, at different
stages. You can say it’s a clump of cells, yes, but it’s a clump of
cells of a very different value. It’s a clump of cells from which all
the other cells develop. So it’s not the same to say, “My nails are a
clump of cells so there’s no problem.” Yes, now. And the fetus is a
clump of cells, they’re of a very different order, of a very different
potential. So even if the fetus is completely not conscious, it’s still
a human fetus. It’s not a squirrel fetus. And that can never change.

And that’s what I mean, regardless of what answer you might find,
fundamentally, that’s something you cannot deny. And because of that, if
you’re honest, you will experience guilt if that’s the action that you
did. And you can’t undo it. So people would say, “Oh, you must just go
to make some merit and that will make things better.” And yes, that’s
all good, that’s all fine. But merit making will result in good
consequences later on. But that has nothing to do with the bad stuff.
You can’t offset that. You can just add more good things that you
experience, sure. But what can actually offset your bad actions,
including killing and so on, even if you did it out of ignorance and not
premeditated murder type of thing, is if you develop your mind towards
*nibbāna* rightly, if you abandon the wrong views, if you overcome
sensuality, factually, as the Buddha said to Aṅgulimāla, that the
consequences he was experiencing while he was still alive, when people
were throwing stones at him and so on, he says, “Oh, bear it, brahmin.
That’s all of the consequences that are left for you.” Although, he
killed so many people before, if he were not to become an *arahant*, he
would have been burning in hells for eons and eons. So there were still
consequences of his actions, but they couldn’t pass that immediate level
while this body was still present. That’s it. That was the extent of
them.

**Q**: So it’s like doing other good actions to try and offset the bad
that you’ve done in the past doesn’t really work, as you’re saying. It’s
the uprooting of the thing that made you do that wrong.

**Nm**: Exactly, exactly. That’s the point.

**Q**: That’s really where the difference is made.

**Nm**: What are the roots of any unwholesome action? Killing, lying,
cheating, stealing, all these precepts that we talk about, what is a
common thread to all of them? If you abandon that, if your practice aims
at uprooting those roots of those actions, then even things that you did
in the past will not actually pertain to you anymore. And those roots
are basically what we talk about, desire, ill will, inauthenticity, lack
of self-transparency, lack of taking up responsibility.

If you actually from then onwards start practicing towards abandoning,
restraining, not proliferating desire, abandoning acting out of ill
will, not giving in to acts that would distract you from yourself, in
the sense of bearing the responsibility, the weight of your existence
and all of that, you are actually uncovering and getting closer to what
the true practice of Dhamma is, and that in and of itself is developing
your mind. So then any consequences that might be waiting for you, if
your mind is truly developed through first accepting the weight of your
actions, as we often say, the weight of responsibility, every day, not
once so it goes away, but whenever it comes back. That cannot change. If
anything you do is rooted in trying to get rid of it, that means you
don’t want responsibility for something you factually did. So that’s
what I mean, like if somebody already has that attitude, that they’re
using that practically to keep their context, that’s extremely good. Now
on top of that, I don’t know what your understanding of Dhamma is, but
yes, sure, make merit, be generous, help others, but really focus on
uprooting the desire, uprooting the conceit, uprooting the craving,
greed, aversion, delusion, and then you won’t have to worry… because who
knows, we all might have done even worse things in our previous lives
that still haven’t been experienced yet, and the consequences of those
things are waiting for us. Even if you haven’t performed an abortion,
had an abortion, performed in this life or anything like that, you might
have done other things, worse things beforehand, and those consequences
are waiting for you. So you shouldn’t feel safe for as long as you’re in
*saṃsāra*.

Many people can accept and come to terms with what they did, but then
what do they do next? Do you just go back to life and sensuality and
proliferation and sexual intercourses and everything else? Or do you
decide to try to uproot those desires even further, so th at the
consequences of your actions now that you can remember, and even more
that you probably can’t remember, cannot touch you?

In other words, use the shame not just to temporarily deal with this
specific thing from the past that you felt guilty or shameful about, but
accept it, use it, and then aim it at the whole *saṃsāra*, basically
abandon the whole thing, because that’s the only true safety. Because
factually there are consequences of your actions, whether you accept it,
come to terms with it, that’s fine, that can obviously help your
well-being here and now, but that does not change the fact that you
killed a being and the consequences will have to be experienced.
