---
alt_doc_url: "https://t.me/HillsideHermitage/255"
author: Sister Medhini
category: Essays
date: 2023-02-23
description: an essay
doc_url: "https://www.hillsidehermitage.org/living-under-an-authority/"
layout: post
title: Living Under An Authority
---

an essay

by **Sister Medhini**



As long as one is alive, being subject to some sort of authority or
authorities is inevitable[^1]. An authority is here meant in a rather
general sense of something or someone who is in a position to exert
influence or control over your behavior or circumstances, in ways that
may be covert or overt.

Most of the time, an authority has to either convince, persuade or
hypnotize us that to follow his rule is indeed what is for our benefit
and is the best thing to do, (so that we do so of our own accord); or
use more subtle ways of making life a bit less agreeable for people who
don’t do so, so that they will modify their behavior as a reflex, but
without being generally aware of why they are doing so. As a last
resort, authorities may turn to brute force. But this is unsustainable
over long periods and with large numbers of people. So generally it is
only used in certain extreme cases (i.e. the inmates of prisons), or
extreme scenarios (war, etc.)

An example of authority benignly doing its job in the first manner would
be something like city councils providing footpaths for people to walk
on in cities, while the rest of the road is designated for cars. I’ve
never heard anyone complaining about the curtailment of their freedom to
walk in whatever part of the road they please. I would bet that very few
people even see this as an imposed structure on their behavior by an
authority, (although it is). The arrangement is simply taken for
granted, for the rather good reason that it factually works. And there
is a generally shared understanding of this.

Obviously, it would be good - ideal - if every form of imposed structure
on people’s behavior by authorities, could be like this; and would
always be something that everyone could comply with willingly and in
full awareness. But what is required for that is that everyone involved
should have a shared understanding of, and agreement on, the arrangement
that will be for the welfare of all; or at least a common *view* as to
the *principles* governing such an arrangement. And this is an
impossibility. Even in very small and specific communities, it is close
to impossible, though not *entirely* impossible.[^2]

So practically always, at least some of the people will need some
persuading, and even with much persuasion and propaganda, many people
will need a degree of faith that the authority knows what is best for
them better than they themselves do, or they will follow orders with a
degree of skepticism and a degree of reluctance, just for the sake of
not being harassed by the authority or by others.

**Owner of your actions**

The first important point to understand regarding this is the following:
no authority can make anyone do anything.

<div lang="en">

> Beings are owners of their actions, heirs of their actions; originate
> from their actions, are bound to their actions, and have their actions
> as their refuge.
>
> — <cite>MN 135</cite>

</div>

Nobody else can possibly be responsible for your own deed. All an
authority can do is impose certain consequences for not acting according
to their law; or offer certain rewards for acting according to their
law. They can also (more underhandly) choose to curtail or control
people’s access to information, or use other means to take advantage of
people’s inauthenticity so that although people appear to be doing
something ‘of their own accord’; in truth, almost nobody is genuinely
taking responsibility for their own choice to do such and such thing,
but rather acting out of fear or a sense of duty to do what they are
‘supposed to be doing.’

Or, In the best case, if the authority has some wisdom, they can clearly
and properly set forth, according to proper reasoning, why acting in
such and such a way is for your welfare and benefit, acting in such and
such ways is for your harm and the harm of others; so that you
understand for yourself why it is better to act in this way and can take
responsibility for that choice, without resenting the authority.[^3]

So to re-emphasize, no authority can make anyone act in a particular
way. All they can do is influence the consequences of acting in one way
or another. Yet, for much of their lives, people end up doing lots of
things - even most things - with the impression of being to some extent
*obliged* to do them. What this impression practically involves is the
belief that there is *no other choice*. In truth, though, there is
always another choice to act differently - which will necessarily have
consequences. Some are worse than others.

When somebody cannot bear so much as thinking about certain kinds of
consequences, they habitually shut their eyes to the mere possibility of
a whole range of actions that might provoke such consequences, and
consequently, feel *obliged* to act in certain ways. (This is only part
of the story, though, because while entertaining the possibility of an
action with very unpleasant consequences is painful enough, it is still
generally not as painful as having to face, time and time again, the
need to make a decision ‘what should I do?’ with the full weight of that
decision lying squarely on one’s own shoulders.)

Being authentic involves refusing to allow yourself any notion of being
obliged to do anything, and taking responsibility for every single
choice you make. This is what will force you to be honest about why you
are choosing one thing and not another. To take a common contemporary
example, if somebody has doubts about a certain vaccine but happens to
have a job for which the vaccine is mandatory, it would be easy for them
to feel that they are being obliged to be vaccinated against their will;
not acknowledging the fact that the choice to act differently is still
open to them, though the consequences of it might be quite unpleasant to
face. An authentic person would be able to reflect, for example, *I’m
getting this vaccine because, although I don’t trust that I have at hand
all the relevant information, and I do think I could be taking a risk;
on the whole, I still don’t see this as justifying giving up my job
while having children to support.* (It should of course be borne in mind
that this is just one example for illustrative purposes, the reader may
replace it with whatever equivalent example they can think of.)

**What is not yours**

Perhaps slightly harder to understand, but equally important, is the
point that not only are you solely responsible for your own actions, but
you are responsible for; the owner of, *solely* your own actions -
*nothing else*.

Anyone who has been born is subject to all sorts of changes,
disturbances, and troubles that are *utterly inaccessible* to their
control. The actions of other people, the quality and quantity of
information you have access to, the words of other people, the
conditions of the world; the weather, and the state of health and
decline of your own body - all come under this. In other words, you can
decide what you do; but that choice and the motivation for it is always
strictly internal; there is no way for your choice to access things
beyond it, just as there is no way for other things or people to access
the domain of your own intentional choice.

Specifically, when you make a choice out of wanting to avoid a certain
unpleasant result, or wanting to arrive at a certain pleasant result,
any result that comes about whether it is experienced as pleasant or
unpleasant - is in an entirely different domain. It happens, so to
speak, by itself.

So for instance, in the example above, somebody might say ‘But it’s not
*right* that they make vaccination mandatory for nurses, there
*shouldn’t* be this consequence for this kind of choice.’ But these are
quite clearly things that belong to others, and that pertains in fact to
an entire domain that doesn’t and cannot belong to you. Whether other
people think and act rightly or wrongly, belongs to them; what belongs
to you are, for instance, the words that you can say to them, but you
can’t give them anything more than the sound of your voice. Equally, in
terms of your own body’s health or sickness, all that you have is the
ability to administer medicine and the possibility to investigate the
causes of disease, but that is as far as it goes. Whether the medicine
works and how it works, belongs to what is essentially the nature of
matter, a different domain that is totally beyond your ability to
access.

Thinking rightly or wrongly depends on the degree to which our thought
corresponds to how things actually are. Whenever people act wrongly and
harmfully, they are trying to exert control and mastery over things
(like other people’s actions) that can’t possibly be controlled by them.

So an authority can at any time arbitrarily decide to impose
restrictions and strictures on your own daily life whenever they so
choose. If a person is bothered by this, although the change to their
life might be troublesome in itself in various ways, what is truly
bothersome is the fact that it should be possible at all. (That’s when
you hear people saying things like ‘that shouldn’t be allowed… we should
be consulted… there should be some process or other…’ etc.) But this
comes back to why I began with this first point, which is something a
person needs to see for themselves at least to some extent if any of
this is to be comprehensible: to live as a human being (or indeed any
kind of being) is to have *some* sort of authority over you. Such that
the conditions of your life and the consequences of everyday actions may
be suddenly changed at any moment.

So this bother is a recognition of something much more deep-rooted and
universal, which is this very discrepancy I’m trying to get at: those
things that one naturally takes to be one’s own and holds dear, are
fundamentally *not* one’s own. (Because if some aspect of your life may
be arbitrarily taken away by some authority or other, whether for valid
reasons or not, then it must necessarily belong more to the authority
than it does to you.)

<div lang="en">

> “I have sons, I have wealth.”  
> Thus the fool frets.  
> He himself is not his own -.  
> How then, sons? How then, wealth?
>
> — <cite>Dhp 62</cite>

</div>

Being a fundamental bother, pertaining to the nature of things in
general, the only way to overcome it is to address it at this level.
(rather than, say, taking up specific issues with the city council or
what-have-you.)

This is done by, in a nutshell, learning how to stop mistakenly holding
as your own those things which cannot be your own.

**How to let go of what isn’t yours.**

This phrase, ‘let go of what isn’t yours,’ is repeated many times in the
suttas, and is something that is repeated a lot in Buddhism generally.
The problem is that at least most people if they try to simply *do* this
directly, will probably end up doing it wrongly. (The reason being that
they would be trying to ‘let go’ of things by way of the exact same
attitude and view with which they were holding those things from the
beginning. In other words, if it were really up to you whether to let go
of something or to keep it, then we wouldn’t have a problem. The point
is to recognize that regardless of whether you let go or not, the thing
was never yours, to begin with.)

That is why I have been emphasizing responsibility: it might seem
paradoxical, but the most practical way to let go of futile suffering is
to *first fully* accept all the responsibility wherever you possibly
can - and never allow yourself to be obliged to act in any way. If a
person were to genuinely take this as a practice and keep it in mind
throughout everything they were to do, it would naturally become
possible for them to give up the source of this bother (and ultimately
the source of all bother whatsoever.)

One practical example of this at a relatively mundane level would follow
from the one I gave above: if somebody took a vaccine while feeling
obliged to do so, either because of a general sense of duty despite some
misgivings, or even because it was mandatory for them to keep their job;
if they later find out that the authority - who they deem responsible
for *making* them take the vaccine - had not been honest, and/or the
vaccine turns out to have worse side-effects than imagined, their mind
will then definitely give rise to quite a lot of anger, frustration, and
resentment.

But if somebody took a vaccine while being fully clear and authentic
about their reasons for doing so, aware that they were taking a risk,
and that they were choosing to do so because it was still overall the
better choice rather than the available alternatives - then they might
find out the exact same information, or even undergo some actual
ill-effect of vaccination, but would suffer far less mental disturbance
and turmoil on account of it. Nor would this make them any less capable
of seeing and judging the immorality of the actions of the relevant
authorities.

More generally, if you start correctly seeing the domain of your
responsibility, this will also naturally make you more able to see where
it ends; what is *not* in your hand and not up to you. This includes
pretty much everything else, most pertinently the things that happen to
you, and whether they are pleasant or unpleasant.

You could then recognize the following very important truth: that
aversion, fear, or really any kind of *bother* regarding anything that
can arise, is directly maintained by assuming that the painful thing is
the situation, and so trying to deal with it, avoid it, get rid of it,
etc - to get rid of the pain of it. (Incidentally, but importantly, it’s
also maintained by acting on the corresponding assumption regarding
*pleasant* things, assuming that pleasure is to be found *in* a
particular experience or situation; so I must get it, access it,
experience it, have it.) In trying to deal with things on this level,
you keep maintaining the notion that you *could* have some say in the
situation, that you can ‘get at it’. Which is exactly how you allow
things to ‘get at you’.

An image that might help to convey this is a small room, with six
windows or doors, and this room confines you, while you keep trying to
get out of it. But each time you break down one of its windows or doors
or try and go out to the thing you see passing outside, the initial
release quickly reveals itself to be another - slightly smaller -
version of the exact same room.

For as long as you keep trying to escape in that way, you will maintain
the implicit assumption that this sort of escape can provide release.
And you won’t see how your escape attempts are what is making the room
even smaller, the confinement even tighter, nor will it be possible to
see the genuine release. And that is because the genuine release is not
*outside* of the confinement, but more like a kind of reconfiguration of
your vision so that you can see how the same thing is not confining at
all anymore - precisely because you see that there is <u>no need</u> to
escape in that way, *which was never possible to the begin with*.

In practical terms, it comes down, again, to realize that any suffering
at all is never because of the situation, but purely because of the
aversion or craving regarding it: an entirely unnecessary, futile, and
gratuitous thing for which you are directly and solely responsible.
Again, this sentence can be stated theoretically, but it has to be
recognized through truly seeing that which is *not up to you*: whatever
you do, in a fundamental sense your situation is always going its own
way. It gets better sometimes, it gets worse sometimes. This would be
how you can see that your only responsibility therein is also what is at
the root of all that is painful and suffering in it, namely the craving,
which is maintained *by trying to deal with the situation so as to get
rid of the pain of it*. And if you were to see this you could let go of
it, which is when you would not suffer albeit amidst the same
circumstances that would previously have caused you much suffering.

**The extremity**

It might be asked whether there is any limit to this principle. - I have
said ‘no matter what the situation’; is this a figure of speech that in
some extreme scenario no longer holds true? The answer is that there are
no limits whatsoever to how far it *can* be taken, depending on how
seriously one takes the fundamental problem of one’s life and the degree
of effort one is prepared to dedicate to the task of overcoming it. The
suttas give many rather extreme examples of people who, having developed
their minds along such lines, do not experience anguish, even amidst the
worst kinds of suffering. My favorite is the story of a laywoman called
‘Nanda’s mother,’ who recounts the following:

<div lang="en">

> I had an only son called Nanda who was dear and pleasing to me. The
> rulers forcibly abducted him on some pretext and had him executed. But
> when my son was under arrest or being arrested, imprisoned or being
> put in prison, killed or being killed, I cannot recall any change in
> the state of my mind.”
>
> — <cite>AN 7.53</cite>

</div>

This might seem initially like a totally incomprehensible or impossible
feat, only explicable by some sort of mystical or magical transformation
of a person into some sort of robot. (And many Buddhists do end up
taking it like this, though they might not admit it). But it is simply
the result of the same principle as we have been describing being
applied and developed to its full extent.

From a slightly different angle, if one takes responsibility for
choosing to live in the domain of a certain authority that one considers
to be oppressive, then the first natural reaction is to search for a
different place where there will be a less oppressive authority in
charge. But still, as I said, one will have to live under some authority
or another; and this principle has no limit: here is a passage from the
suttas spoken by Mara, who in the suttas is a deity who holds the
position of a top bureaucrat over the system of samsara, (by which he is
equally fully bound).

<div lang="en">

> “The eye is mine, ascetic, forms are mine, eye-contact and its base of
> consciousness are mine. Where can you go, ascetic, to escape from me?
> The ear is mine, ascetic, sounds are mine … The nose is mine, ascetic,
> odors are mine … The tongue is mine, ascetic, tastes are mine … The
> body is mine, ascetic, tactile objects are mine … The mind is mine,
> ascetic, mental phenomena are mine, mind-contact and its base of
> consciousness are mine. Where can you go, ascetic, to escape from me?”
>
> — <cite>SN 4.19</cite>

</div>

In another sense, pertinently, Mara is also called the King of Death,
and this could be taken in a very literal sense. To be in the realm of
Mara is to be subject to old age and death. That is what holds sway over
the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind. That is the ultimate
authority. And the escape from it is still the same.

<div lang="en">

> “That of which they say ‘It’s mine,’  
> And those who speak in terms of ‘mine’—  
> If your mind exists among these,  
> You won’t escape me, ascetic.”  
>   
> The Blessed One:  
> “That which they speak of is not mine,  
> I’m not one of those who speak of mine.  
> You should know thus, O Evil One:  
> Even my path you will not see.”
>
> — <cite>SN 4.19</cite>

</div>

[^1]: ‘you’re gonna have to serve somebody, yes indeed’ — Bob Dylan

[^2]: The requirement is pretty much that such a community should be a
    community of noble disciples; i.e. people who possess the Right
    View, one of the characteristics of which is ‘seeing right as right
    and wrong as wrong’; another characteristic being that all not only
    have the same goal - liberation from birth, death and suffering- but
    the same understanding of how to achieve that goal. Note that this
    is absolutely NOT the same as a cult, in which people voluntarily
    deny their own individual point of view in favour of that of the
    group and the leader - in this, rather, each person has individually
    come to an understanding of certain fundamental principles that are
    timeless and universal, and each of them are individually also
    defined as ‘independent of others.’ Unlike a cult, for such
    individuals it is irrelevant whether they are alone or in a group,
    aside from practical convenience and similar considerations. But
    because their understanding pertains to something universal, they
    will naturally be ‘on the same page’ at least as far as important
    things go, without needing very much in the way of micro-managed
    rules to govern their behavior.

[^3]: Actually, if this is taken to its conclusion such an authority
    can’t really be called ‘an authority’ in the usual sense of the
    word. The Buddha being the obvious example that comes to mind, who
    specifically stated on several occasions that it was not up to him
    whether people followed his instructions or not; and he particularly
    did not think of himself as an authority over the monks.

    <div lang="en">

    > But Ananda, what does the Sangha expect from me? I have taught the
    > Dhamma, Ananda, having made no secret opposed to the public. The
    > Perfected One has no closed teacher’s fist with regard to
    > teachings. If anyone thinks, ‘I shall take charge of the Sangha,’
    > or ‘the Sangha should refer to me,’ let him make some statement
    > about the Sangha; but the Perfected One does not think in this
    > way.)
    >
    > — <cite>DN 16</cite>

    </div>
