---
title: 28hh- Sense Of Shame And Fear Of Wrongdoing
author: Hillside Hermitage
layout: post
---

```{=context}
\page [yes]
```

**Q:** Authenticity, self-honesty, sense of shame and a fear of
wrongdoing, these are all prerequisites for developing freedom from
suffering, but what about guilt?

**Nyanamoli:** Those necessary qualities prevent you from doing
unwholesome things based on greed, aversion and delusion. If you don't
have those qualities preventing you from bad behaviour, then there are
only circumstances around you preventing you, and if circumstances
around you are in favour of shamelessness, then you certainly won't be
keeping your behaviour in check. That's why it's good to have a sense of
shame, even if you don't necessarily have wisdom or restraint in place,
at least that sense of shame will keep you from becoming like an animal
in terms of your behaviour. That's why it's called "a guardian of the
world". As the Buddha said, if there were no sense of shame, sons would
be sleeping with mothers and sisters, and fathers with daughters, it
would be as wild as the animal realm.

> "Monks, these two bright qualities guard the world. Which two? Sense
> of shame and fear of wrongdoing. If these two bright qualities did not
> guard the world, there would be no recognition of 'mother' here, no
> recognition of 'mother's sister,' 'uncle's wife,' 'teacher's wife,' or
> 'wife of those who deserve respect.' The world would be immersed in
> promiscuity, like rams with goats, roosters with pigs, or dogs with
> jackals. But because these two bright qualities guard the world, there
> is recognition of 'mother,' 'mother's sister,' 'uncle's wife,'
> 'teacher's wife,' & 'wife of those who deserve respect.'"

> -- [AN 2.9](https://www.accesstoinsight.org/tipitaka/an/an02/an02.009.than.html)

**Q:** Human beings have an inherent sense of shame. You can sense when
you're doing something wrong.

**Nm:** There is a natural sense of shame, in regard to nudity, body
exposure, lewd course words, stealing, lying, and so on. If there wasnt
that natural shame, we would be getting up to all sorts of bad
behaviour, leading to mental decline and complete chaos. When you're
honest and authentic, that sense of shame is what gets revealed. It's
not about becoming morally judgmental. That just comes out of ill will
and repression. No, if you're authentic, then you realise that there are
things that you don't necessarily want to do with others or to be known
publicly, which means then, because you're authentic, you wouldn't be
doing it. And if you have guilt on account of past behaviours, instead
of denying it, ignoring it, you accept the guilt as a result of what
you've done carelessly and then next time, it will make you think twice,
because you're not running away from the disagreeable feeling of guilt,
you're accepting it. And sometimes it can endure for days, and then come
back again and again, maybe even for years later, but each time it comes
you must accept it.

It's good to be guilt free. And the only way to be guilt free is through
fully accepting guilt and then going beyond it. Not by ignoring it or
denying it. And that is exactly the case, people feel that inherent
sense of shame but they blame society for it. I mean, yes, society has a
lot of play in the degree of shaming, but there is that threshold, which
is the natural shame. And some people have more of it, some people have
less of it. But then people find that natural shame to be a problem
because it can be unpleasant if it's preventing them from doing what
they want to do. And then yes, they tend to blame society, or blame the
culture, they rebel against it, they try to override it. But that's a
completely misplaced effort. The better effort is to accept that there
is a place for the natural degree of shame in regard to doing things
that are inappropriate, not because someone says so but because you
recognise that certain actions lead to your own harm, to the harm of
others and do not lead you to wisdom or contentment, and that if there
was no sense of shame, you would easily be acting in ways that would not
be in your best interest.

For example, you can see the dogs that go into a village because they
caught the scent of a female on heat. They sense that they're most
likely going to be attacked and maybe seriously injured by all the other
pack dogs. But they're just focussed on that female and lose what little
perspective they had. Their senses just pull them into that direction
where they get attacked and suffer many unfortunate consequences. They
can't factor the consequences in because the mind doesn't possess the
same powers of reflection as the human mind. That's why they don't have
a natural sense of shame. But for most people, they do have that
recognition which will be guarding them from going in directions which
are extremely unwholesome and lead to further suffering.

**Q:** How do you develop that sense of shame?

**Nm:** By becoming more self transparent, by keeping your desires in
check. Then you will realise that with or without the sense of shame,
you are the one responsible for saying yes to desires and following
them, because it doesn't matter what thoughts your mind might be
presenting you, in forms of the desire, possibilities for things you
want to do, that doesn't matter. What matters is whether you accept it,
following through with it or not. So with self-honesty, you don't blame
society, the government, you don't blame your genes, "Oh, that's how I
was born". Even if all those things are in play, you are always
responsible for the consequences of your choices. For example, a person
trying to give up an addiction, can reflect on the consequences of their
actions, but when that desire is present they don't see consequences
relevant on the same level, as where the addiction is, but if you are
self honest, you will be able to allow whatever pressing desire arises
and have enough space to not give in to it, to not be hooked by it.
However, you have to start seeing benefits even in that initial
restraint. If you don't, then it wont work. There won't be enough ground
for any proper development, because without that basic restraint
beforehand, you won't be able to allow desire to come close without you
acting upon it. As soon as it arises, you'll be acting upon it. The
restraining prevents it, it doesn't mean it's gonna make things easier,
but it will be more peaceful later on. The mind grows from it and until
then, it's gonna reveal the underlying pain beneath the desire and lack
of restraint.
